fpsyg-11-00294 March 7, 2020 Time: 16:26 # 1
REVIEW
published: 10 March 2020
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00294
Edited by:
Tadhg Eoghan MacIntyre,
University of Limerick, Ireland
Reviewed by:
Fátima Bernardo,
University of Evora, Portugal
Veronica Muffato,
University of Padova, Italy
*Correspondence:
Jianchao Peng
pengjianchao@njau.edu.cn
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Environmental Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 08 October 2019
Accepted: 06 February 2020
Published: 10 March 2020
Citation:
Peng J, Strijker D and Wu Q
(2020) Place Identity: How Far Have
We Come in Exploring Its Meanings?
Front. Psychol. 11:294.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00294
Place Identity: How Far Have We
Come in Exploring Its Meanings?
Jianchao Peng 1*, Dirk Strijker 2 and Qun Wu 1
1 College of Public Administration, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China, 2 Faculty of Spatial Sciences, University
of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands
In order to synthesize the extensively studied place identities and their meanings,
this paper reviews how researchers have conceived and deconstructed place identity.
CiteSpace, a scientometric tool for visualizing and analyzing trends and patterns in
scientiﬁc literature, is used to identify the active topics and new developments of
publications in place identity. The data set input into CiteSpace consists of 1,011
bibliographic records retrieved from the core database of Web of Science with a title
search of the articles published between 1985 and July 2019. The scientometric review
reveals the extensive applications of place identity in various topics. Studies in this
ﬁeld experienced an active exploration in plural disciplines after 2000, and the hot area
gradually concentrated on the discipline of humanities and social sciences after 2010
and shifted toward place marketing until now. A network of co-cited references identiﬁed
seven dominant research clusters, of which the research on the inﬂuence of place
identity on social actors’ attitudes and behaviors is most prominent and the research
on the effects of physical environment change on place identity captures the latest
emerging area. Versatile meanings of place identity are witnessed in different clusters
and articles of a cluster. These meanings are intertwined in shaping the knowledge base
of thematic concentrations. To supplement the scientometric analysis, a deep survey
on measuring methods and roles of place identity in the contents of academic articles
was done to trace knowledge connections between different empirical understandings
of place identity. Finally, this paper summarizes the meanings of place identity in four
dimensions and in turn offers some suggestions for further research directions.
Keywords: place identity, meanings, CiteSpace, scientometric, review
INTRODUCTION
Place identity is a versatile concept upon which many psychological theories of human–
environment relations are built (Zimmerbauer et al., 2012; Gieseking et al., 2014). The social
constructivist theory of place identity sheds light on individuals’ subjective perceptions of
geographical space, providing valuable insights for studies of various disciplines, such as geography,
sociology, psychology, environmental sciences and ecology, public administration, spatial planning,
and so on (Haartsen et al., 2000). As broadly acknowledged, place identity was initially introduced
by Proshansky (1978), who deﬁned place identity as “those dimensions of self that deﬁne the
individual’s personal identity in relation to the physical environment by means of a complex pattern
of conscious and unconscious ideas, feelings, values, goals, preferences, skills, and behavioral
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 294
fpsyg-11-00294 March 7, 2020 Time: 16:26 # 2
Peng et al. Place Identity Meanings
tendencies relevant to a speciﬁc environment” (Proshansky, 1978,
p. 155). Proshansky’s view on place identity has been widely
referred to. Another dominant explanation of place identity
can be found in most of Paasi’s articles (Paasi, 1986, 1991,
2002c, 2003, 2009a,b). He thought it would be beneﬁcial to
distinguish analytically two aspects of place identity, namely,
place identity of a place and people’s place identity. The former
refers to those features of nature, culture, and people that are
used in the discourses and classiﬁcations of science, politics,
cultural activism, regional marketing, tourism, governance, and
political or religious regionalization, to distinguish one place
from others. The latter refers to the identiﬁcation of individuals
with a place. The deﬁnitions of place identity by early leading
scholars, such as Proshansky and Paasi, from diﬀerent disciplines
have inﬂuenced the formation of the versatile meanings of place
identity to a great extent.
There are many other scholars who have contributed a lot
to enriching the meaning and theory of place identity (Relph,
1976; Tuan, 1977; Peterson, 1988; Saleh, 1998; Twigger-Ross
et al., 2003; Carrus et al., 2005; Huigen and Meijering, 2005;
Hauge, 2007; Groote and Haartsen, 2008; White et al., 2008).
However, in most occasions, their conceptual foundation of
place identity revolves on either the place identity of a place
or people’s place identity. They seldom notice both sides of
place identity, or at least, there is a paucity of empirical
studies that have discerned the two sides of place identity.
Academic journals have witnessed increasing publications in
relation to place identity over the last 40 years, particularly
since 2006, as shown in Figure 1 . Nevertheless, few studies
have reviewed and elaborated the versatile meanings of place
identity. Limited arguments in a few studies are available on
the relationship between these meanings. For example, Paasi
(1986, 2002c) used “subjective identity of a region” to connect
the two aspects of regional identity. The “subjective identity
of a region” refers to images held by the people living in
and outside the region, which resemble regional consciousness.
Few studies proposed that individuals’ identiﬁcation with a
place can be reﬂected in the identities that they ascribe to
the place and are subsequently incorporated into their own
identities (Rijnks and Strijker, 2013). However, these intricate
debates on the analytical interactions between place, people,
and place identity make the meanings of place identity even
more confusing. An additional obstacle to the understanding of
place identity is the widely complained-about unclear relations
between place identity and other environmental psychology
concepts, such as place attachment, rootedness, sense of
place, place dependence, and place satisfaction (Lewicka, 2011;
Xu et al., 2015). Distinctions between these concepts have
never been unanimously agreed upon and are still under
discussion today.
Another point that might have also caused a fuzzy
understanding of place identity is the interchangeable use
of “region” and “place” in articles about place identity. Region
is usually considered by geographers as a larger unit than place
(Entrikin, 1991). Some scholars deem region as historically
contingent social processes that occur at various spatial scales
(Paasi, 1991, 1996, 2004). Compared with region, place is
FIGURE 1 | Number of publications on place identity from 1985 to July 2019.
A total of 1,011 bibliographic records were obtained in the core data set of
Web of Science with a title search for “place identity” or “regional identity” or
“regional identities” between 1985 (the earliest year for data available in the
core data set) and 2019.
conceptualized more ﬂexibly, without any presuppositions
of scale. It has no essence but is open, ﬂuid, and contested.
Place is positioned in complex ways in power geometries and
experienced in diﬀerent ways by diﬀerent people (Massey, 1994,
1995). The broad categories make “place” increasingly preferred
by geographers today (Paasi, 2002b). While actors operate and
(re)construct identities across scales, the link of identity to either
the omni-scale region or the scale-free place can both hold and
justify their positions (Paasi, 1996). Numerous articles titled with
either “regional identity” or “place identity” can be searched in
any journal database. Some of them may have a clear disciplinary
background; for example, “regional identity” papers ﬁt into
geography, while “place identity” papers, into environmental
psychology. However, there also exists chaos where mixed
meanings of place identity are embodied in these two kinds of
articles. Therefore, we include both of them in this review work,
and in the rest of this article, the term “place identity” will be
used primarily as a substitute for “regional identity.”
Diﬀerent understandings of place identity and consequent
divergent methods of measuring this construct make the
accumulation of knowledge in this domain diﬃcult (Lewicka,
2011). The emerging increment of publications in which
numerous roles of place identity have been claimed makes
it tough to grasp a coherent intellectual landscape of this
area, if it exists. In order to synthesize the extensively studied
place identities and their meanings, this work reviews how the
literature has conceived and deconstructed place identity. We
intend to guide audiences through the development of place
identity since its introduction by Proshansky. The emphasis will
be on sketching an overall intellectual landscape and investigating
the active topics and new developments. More eﬀorts will be paid
to a deep examination of the measures and roles of place identity
for tracing knowledge connections between diﬀerent empirical
understandings of place identity.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 294
fpsyg-11-00294 March 7, 2020 Time: 16:26 # 3
Peng et al. Place Identity Meanings
In the next sections, we ﬁrst use CiteSpace to identify the
active topics and new developments of publications on place
identity. CiteSpace is a visual analytic system for visualizing
emerging trends and critical changes in scientiﬁc literature
(Chen et al., 2014a,b). Compared with a traditional literature
survey, which relies on domain experts’ insights and selections
of publications, CiteSpace adopts a computational and visual
analytic approach drawn from the ﬁeld of scientometrics and
information visualization and can reach a much broader and
more diverse range of relevant topics (Chen et al., 2014a,b).
Our data set input into CiteSpace consists of 1,011 bibliographic
records that are derived from the core database of Web of Science
(WoS) with a title search for “place identity” or “regional identity”
or “regional identities” between 1985 (the earliest year for data
available in the core data base) and July 2019. Each bibliographic
record contains the metadata of a published article, including the
authors, the title, the abstract, the keywords, and the references
with relevant information. In total, 31,307 references are cited
by these articles. The examination of the measures and roles of
place identity is based on some representative articles selected
according to the analysis results generated by CiteSpace.
MEANINGS OF PLACE IDENTITY
People’s Place Identity
On an individual’s identity card, there is always information
about where he or she is from. Everybody in the world belongs
somewhere. Although the ﬁrst impression an individual gives
to others is always his or her physical appearance, such an
impression would often coincide with the assumption of the
place one comes from. For example, people with yellow skin
and black hair would be judged as Asian. Therefore, we may
realize that man is not simply a physical creature but mostly
shaped by relationships, be they social, cultural, environmental,
or others. The process by which other people judge you on your
appearance is an expression of social and cultural relationships, as
they are deﬁning you as diﬀerent from themselves. The inﬂuence
that a place imposes on an individual’s identity is one of those
relationships, and it constitutes part of the individual’s selfhood
(Basso, 1996, p. 146).
In the late 1970s, to enlighten people on the importance
of places inﬂuencing the formation of individuals’ identities,
the term “place identity” was introduced by researchers
within the interdisciplinary ﬁeld of environmental psychology
(Proshansky, 1976, 1978; Hauge, 2007). It is described as
individuals’ incorporation of places into the larger concept of
self (Proshansky et al., 1983). The work of Proshansky et al.
(1983) has been criticized for their tendency to emphasize
the individualistic dimensions of place identity (Dixon and
Durrheim, 2000). This shortcoming has been mitigated by the
later work on place identity, which suggested a genuinely social
understanding of place identity by showing how places might
become signiﬁcant and contested arenas of collective being and
belonging (Bonaiuto et al., 1996; Devine-Wright and Lyons, 1997;
Dixon and Durrheim, 2000).
Despite the extensive studies on place identity after
Proshansky, the theory of place identity is less developed
(Bonaiuto et al., 1996). On the one hand, unlike gender,
race, or nationality, which constitutes one category of
identity, place contains symbols of many diﬀerent social
categories and personal meanings and represents and maintains
identity on diﬀerent levels and dimensions (Hauge, 2007).
In other words, place is a component of diverse sub-identity
categories, which makes the term “place identity” diﬃcult to
operate. When researchers make place identity the focus of
their studies, they seldom follow the theoretical framework
developed by Proshansky and his colleagues (Proshansky,
1978; Proshansky et al., 1983; Proshansky and Fabian,
1987). It is often referred as a term to describe a subjective
feeling of identiﬁcation with home, a neighborhood, or some
larger space (Twigger-Ross et al., 2003; Carrus et al., 2005;
White et al., 2008).
On the other hand, along with place identity, there are
a number of other constructs developed by environmental
psychologists to deﬁne and measure individuals’ relations with
places, such as place attachment (Giuliani and Feldman, 1993),
place dependence (Stokols and Shumaker, 1981), sense of place
(Lalli, 1992), and so on. There has been no universal agreement
on the relationships between these constructs (Fresque-Baxter
and Armitage, 2012). White et al. (2008) saw place identity
and place dependence as two dimensions of place attachment
when they studied the eﬀect of prior experience with setting
and place attachment on visitors’ perceptions of recreation
impacts. However, Bleam (2018) found that place identity is
more than a sub-construct of place attachment. Hernández
et al. (2007) viewed place identity and place attachment as
diﬀerent constructs. They thought place attachment develops
before place identity. They contended that “one person could
be attached to a place but not be identiﬁed with it, ” and
“someone could have a high personal identity with a place
and not a high place attachment.” Hernández et al. (2010)
argued that “place attachment is an aﬀective–emotional bond
with residence places, whereas place identity is a cognitive
mechanism, a component of self-concept and/or of personal
identity in relation to the place one belongs to.” Antonsich’s
(2010) work pointed out the terminological confusion of these
place-based concepts. He summarized that sometimes, place
attachment is treated as a synonym of place identity, correlated
with it or subsumed within it, or occasionally as a prerequisite.
Sometimes, both place identity and place attachment are instead
treated as components of sense of place (Jorgensen and Stedman,
2001). In other cases, place attachment is described as a
superordinate category (Kyle et al., 2004). Chow and Healey’s
(2008) argument is consistent with Antonsich’s ﬁndings. They
noted that place attachment is subsumed under place identity
in some cases, while some others view place identity as a
form of attachment or consider both identity and attachment
as dimensions of sense of place. This consensus is shared by
Hernández et al. (2007) as well, who identiﬁed four diﬀerent
relations between place attachment and place identity according
to their review of previous research. Other proposals suggest
grading the sense of place. Shamai (1991) divided the sense of
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 294
fpsyg-11-00294 March 7, 2020 Time: 16:26 # 4
Peng et al. Place Identity Meanings
place into seven levels, in which attachment is a phase prior
to identiﬁcation. 1
Confusion and overlap of the concepts that deﬁne emotional
bonds to places, along with the multidimensional meanings
of place itself, lead to the anxiety and criticism on the vague
meanings of place identity (Hauge, 2007; Lewicka, 2008).
Nevertheless, it has ﬁlled a gap in environmental theory
and research, through bringing forth the idea that identity
is formalized against the backdrop of physical environment
(Bonaiuto et al., 1996; Hauge, 2007).
Place Identity of a Place
Place identity ascribed by people to a place is constructed to
diﬀerentiate one place from others. Diﬀerences between places
are attributed or perceived by inhabitants living in or outside
of those places. It is, to some extent, if not entirely, a subjective
social construct based on objective physical settings. 2 In this
sense, the meaning of the construct “place identity” of a place
resembles that of the construct individual’s “place identity”
in that both of them are developed to describe subjective
cognition about places.
As to the question of what place identity of a place is,
the answer is still not clear, though it has been, for a long
time, a frequently mentioned term in geographical research.
Paasi (2001, 2002a,c, 2003, 2009b) argued that place identity
refers to those elements of nature, culture, and regional life
(inhabitants, people, or population) that distinguish a region
from others. Groote and Haartsen (2008) deﬁned place identity
as a combination of physical and man-made processes, speciﬁc
elements and structures in places, and meanings ascribed to
places. The elements that have been referred to by studies as
components of place identity indeed cover almost every aspect
of a place. In other words, place identity can be anything
that makes a place identiﬁable within the spatial system. There
are no ﬁxed components of place identity. Language is one
of the most popular features to make places distinctive. Saleh
(1998) used physical conﬁguration of places or architectonics
to describe place identity of Saudi cities, where local images
are enhanced to meet individual and public needs. What’s
more, people do not discern places in the same way. They
perceive identities of places diﬀerently and diﬀerentiate them by
drawing on diﬀerent elements, such as physical features, cultural
attributes, historical associations, experiential ties, and so forth
(Peterson, 1988).
In many cases, the vague meaning and uncertain components
of place identity make researchers map it by simply tracing
unique features as indicators of place identity of that area. Paasi
(2009b) criticized that it may lead to a rather “loose use” of
place identity in research when any of these features is regarded
1The (suggestive) scale of sense of place consists of: (0) not having any sense of
place, (1) knowledge of being located in a place, (2) belonging to a place, (3)
attachment to a place, (4) identifying with the place goals, (5) involvement in a
place, (6) sacriﬁce for a place.
2Haartsen et al. (2000) argued that regional identities are not (“natural” or
“objective”) characteristics of this area, which is not completely consistent with
Paasi’s (1986, 2002c) view. Paasi believed that the “identity of a region” includes
“objective scientiﬁc classiﬁcations” as well.
as an illustration of place identity. People’s consciousness of a
place should not be overlooked for understanding the identity of
that place. Place identity comprises not only a material basis but
also a “mental sphere” (Knapp, 2006). Place identity is formed
after the place has achieved an established status in both the
spatial structure of the society and its social consciousness (Paasi,
1991). From this view, Paasi (1986, 2002c) argued that subjective
images and objective classiﬁcations are the two subcategories
of place identity.
Compared with tracing indicators of place identity, the
intention to claim place identity is sometimes considered as a
more important matter (Billig, 1995). Identities are ascribed to
a place by social actors who have diﬀerent knowledge, interests,
or power in that place. How place identities are constructed in
discourses reveals partly the power balance between claimants
in the political arena (Haartsen et al., 2000; Paasi, 2002c,
2003). Therefore, place identities are contested. What’s more,
place identity should be understood as a dynamic process
(Haartsen et al., 2000; Paasi, 2001). The formation of place
identity is a process of shaping territorial boundaries, symbolism,
and institutions (Paasi, 2003). Place consciousness can be
strengthened during that process. Perceptions and understanding
of the place identity of a place are often interpreted in narratives
or discourses. Discourses about place identity are representations
of claimants’ memories of the past, images of the present, and
often, utopias of the future (Paasi, 2001).
ACTIVE TOPICS AND NEW
DEVELOPMENTS IN PLACE IDENTITY
A Lightweight Survey of Major T opics
Two polygonal tree maps (see Figures 2 , 3), known as foam
trees, were generated by Carrot2 to provide an instant and
primary detection of major topics in the studies of place identity.
Carrot2 is an open source search results clustering engine
that can automatically organize small collections of documents
from various search sources into thematic categories 3. Figure 2
shows a foam tree based on the 113 results of a web search
with the keywords “place identity.” The foam tree in Figure 3
was derived from the 1,011 bibliographic records of WoS,
which were converted to the required format of Carrot2 prior
to the data input.
With the views generated by Carrot2, the lightweight survey
of major topics in the literature on place identity provides
a useful basic reference to how the term “place identity” is
generally conceived (Chen et al., 2014a). As shown in the
two ﬁgures, psychology, cultural identity, role, identity theory,
identity development or processes, identity construction, and place
attachment are among the leading topics in the literature on
place identity. Among other major topics, studies on place
identity at diﬀerent spatial scales constitute a certain portion
of the data set, such as community identity, urban identity,
regional identity, national identity , and national and regional
identities. A distinction between the two aspects of place identity
3http://project.carrot2.org/index.html
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 294
fpsyg-11-00294 March 7, 2020 Time: 16:26 # 5
Peng et al. Place Identity Meanings
FIGURE 2 | A foam tree map indicating the major topics in place identity on the Internet. The visualization was generated by Carrot2 workbench based on 113
search results of place identity.
can be observed in the foam trees. Whereas topics such as
local identity , new identities , national identity , identity politics ,
identity of the area , importance of regional identity , role of
regional identity, urban identity, development of regional identity,
community identity , rural identities , place names , and regional
speciﬁcation refer greatly to “place identity of a place, ” topics such
as role in identity , identity processes , identity development , and
one’s own place identity have obvious connections to “people’s
place identity.”
Category and Keyword Co-occurrence
Networks
Analyses of category or keyword co-occurrence networks can
oﬀer a more rigorous and reliable representation of the literature
on major topics of a domain (Chen et al., 2014a,b; Shi and
Liu, 2019). Each publication in the WoS is assigned one or
more subject categories and a number of keywords. Through
analyzing the input records with CiteSpace, a total of 81 unique
subject categories were found (see Figure 4A ). The size of a
node in Figure 4A indicates the citation frequency of a category.
For example, the largest node in Figure 4A is GEOGRAPHY ,
with the largest citation count value of 142, which means 142
publications of the data set ﬁt in the category of geography. The
top 10 subject categories ranked by citation counts are geography
(142), environmental sciences and ecology (91), sociology (90),
social sciences (87), psychology (82), environmental studies (77),
history (71), area studies (67), government and law (66), and
political science (64). In a visualization of CiteSpace, a purple ring
is used to represent the degree of a node’s betweenness centrality.
A node with high betweenness centrality indicates its important
role of bridging the nodes it links. The top 10 subject categories
ranked by betweenness centrality are psychology (0.30), sociology
(0.28), environmental sciences and ecology (0.27), psychologyó
multidisciplinary (0.22), environmental studies (0.19), psychiatry
(0.18), geography (0.16), genetics and heredity (0.14), education
and educational research (0.13), and regional and urban planning
(0.12). A total of 183 unique co-occurring keywords were
found (see Figure 4B ). The top 10 keywords ranked by
citation counts are identity (109), place (82), place identity
(71), space (68), regional identity (43), politics (41), attachment
(41), geography (35), community (32), and place attachment
(30). From the results in Figure 4 , we can observe a general
knowledge base that supports the research of place identity. As
an interdisciplinary subject, place identity obtains its primary
foundation in geographical sciences. Under the bridging eﬀorts
of psychology, sociology, and environmental sciences, it develops
in other relevant domains, for example, government, political
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 294
fpsyg-11-00294 March 7, 2020 Time: 16:26 # 6
Peng et al. Place Identity Meanings
FIGURE 3 | A foam tree map generated by Carrot2, indicating the major topics in place identity based on 1,011 bibliographic records about place identity in the core
database of Web of Science.
science, or spatial policy. It is worth noting that place attachment
and place identity co-occur frequently as keywords, which
indicates that there are considerable debates in the literature on
their close and obscure relationship.
As shown in Figure 4, the research on place identity involves
numerous disciplinary areas, which may shift over time. The
burstness, signifying the fast shift of subject categories and
keywords, indicates the most active research topics (Chen
et al., 2014a,b). Figure 5 shows the top 20 subject categories
and keywords with the strongest citation bursts. The reﬁned
review results of the subject categories in Figure 5 reveal
the neurobiological supports for the phenomenological studies
of human geography and environmental psychology on place
identity (Lengen and Kistemann, 2012). At the top of the list
of Figure 5A , the discipline of biology, including the subject
categories of biochemistry and molecular biology, neurosciences,
neurosciences and neurology, and genetics and heredity, occupied
the hot area of place identity study prior to 2000. The decade
after 2000 experienced an active exploration in plural disciplines
in research on place identity, such as history, computer science,
geography, psychology, economics, cultural studies, planning, and
education. Gradually, the hot area came to the humanities
and social sciences after 2010, while the subject category social
sciences—interdisciplinary obtained the strongest burst strength
of 5.5864 in 2013–2016. Recent hot areas were captured
by architecture, hospitality, leisure, sport, and tourism, which
suggests a shift of the study focus of place identity toward place
products or place marketing. In general, the development of
place identity research mainly experienced four stages, namely,
theory construction and veriﬁcation, active multidisciplinary
exploration, in-depth study in social sciences, and application of
place identity theory in place development.
Bursts of keywords may provide a more reﬁned indication of
hot topics (see Figure 5B ). All of the top 20 keywords bursts
appeared in the last 15 years. The keyword attachment has a
strong burst from 2017 to 2019, with the maximum burst strength
3.6387, and it is used in 41 articles. It seems the keywords
on the list can be classiﬁed into four groups. The ﬁrst group
focuses on places of various scales, includinghome, neighborhood,
city, nationalism, and world. The second group focuses on
personal characteristics, attitudes, and behaviors, including race,
gender, participation, experience, and attachment. The third
group focuses on the construction of place identity, including
construction, place-making, representation, and discourse. The
fourth group focuses on globalization and countermeasures,
including culture, authenticity, globalization , governance, and
management. The above preliminary classiﬁcation implies that
the research problems of place identity mainly revolve around
where the place identity represents,whose place identity it is,what
the place identity is, and how the place identity is aﬀected.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 294
fpsyg-11-00294 March 7, 2020 Time: 16:26 # 7
Peng et al. Place Identity Meanings
FIGURE 4 | Co-occurring subject categories network (A) and co-occurring keywords network (B). The color of the network edge indicates the year in which the
co-citation link was ﬁrst made. For example, early co-citations are colored in blue, and the latest are in yellow and orange.
FIGURE 5 | Top 20 subject categories (A) and keywords (B) with the strongest bursts.
Clusters of Co-cited References
CiteSpace provides visualizations of synthesized networks of
co-cited references, which are usually used for the analysis of
emerging trends and new developments of a research ﬁeld (Chen
et al., 2014a,b). Figure 6 shows a snapshot of the network of co-
cited references derived from the core data set with CiteSpace.
A link in the network represents how frequently two articles
are cited together by other articles in the data set. A red ring
in the network denotes a citation burst, while a purple ring
represents the betweenness centrality. The size of a node of the
network indicates the frequency of citations of an article. Based
on their interconnectivity, these nodes can be aggregated into
clusters that represent thematic concentrations. A cluster is a
group of tightly coupled references that form the intellectual
base of a research ﬁeld, and articles citing these references
represent the research front of that ﬁeld (Chen et al., 2014a,b;
Shi and Liu, 2019). The seven largest clusters numbered from
0 to 6 are shown in Figure 6 . Table 1 summarizes the basic
information of the seven clusters. The label of each cluster is
extracted with a log-likelihood ratio (LLR) test, and it summarizes
the impact of the cluster on more recent research (Chen et al.,
2014b). A silhouette value ranging from the lowest, -1, to the
highest, 1, is used to measure the homogeneity of a cluster. Each
of the silhouette scores in Table 1 is close to 1, suggesting a
reliable quality of grouping. Timeline visualizations generated
by CiteSpace can make the new developments in research on
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 294
fpsyg-11-00294 March 7, 2020 Time: 16:26 # 8
Peng et al. Place Identity Meanings
FIGURE 6 | A network of co-cited references based on citation instances made by the top 50 most-cited articles per year between 1985 and 2019.
place identity more easily recognized. As shown in Figure 7, the
most recently emerging area is captured by cluster #3, labeled
natural disaster , which can also be conﬁrmed by the average
year in Table 1 , which indicates the average publishing year
of the cited references of a cluster. Cluster #6 on exploring
residents’ attitude and cluster #4 on regional development are
also relatively new.
Among these seven clusters, the largest one is cluster #0,
labeled place identity , which contains 31 member references.
Most of the top cited references in cluster #0 discussed place
attachment, and some of them debated its relationship with
place identity (Hernández et al., 2007; Lewicka, 2008, 2010,
2011; Rollero and Piccoli, 2010). Articles citing members of a
cluster determine the aggregations of co-cited references, and
they indicate major interests and research trends in a thematic
ﬁeld associated with the cluster (Chen et al., 2014a,b). Table 2
shows the most-representative citing articles of the seven clusters.
CiteSpace identiﬁed 11 citing articles shaping cluster #0. Evident
thematic connections revolving around place identity can be
observed from the titles of these citing articles. Particularly,
these connections reveal the research concentration of cluster
#0 on the role of place identity in social actors’ attitudes and
behaviors in the present transitional world with environmental
depredation, climate change, urban renewal, and increasing and
complex human needs, if we look further into the contents
of these articles.
The second largest cluster, #1, shows thematic focus on the
construction of place identity in the process of place promotion.
The term “place promotion” appears in the title of a top citing
article (Zimmerbauer, 2011). Place promotion and marketing
are keystone practices in regional development, where political
forces always play a determinant role. Deinstitutionalization
or institutionalization of a region imposed by politics may
lead to regional exclusion or othering when place promotion
strategies are taken. Spatial identities are constructed by various
stakeholders at diﬀerent spatial scales. Place identity emanating
from residents’ perspectives has attracted a lot of attention in this
theme, whereas its construction is still essentially impacted by the
globalizing forces of development.
For cluster #2, the term “sonic geography” in the title of the
top citing article (Boland, 2010) is extracted to be the group title.
In the article, the inﬂuence of sound, for example, a distinctive
accent and/or dialect, on the construction of local identity
is examined. The cited references of cluster #2 concentrate
highly on Paasi’s articles (Paasi, 2002b,c, 2003), which results
in the thematic focus of this cluster on the construction of
place identity of regions. Research emphases of cluster #2 have
been put on special factors shaping place identity, for instance,
vernacular, symbols, narratives, children’s reading and writing,
and professionals involved in the development of a region.
The young cluster #3 focuses on the eﬀects of physical
environment (change) on place identity and well-being. Knez
et al. (2018a) article titled “Before and After a Natural Disaster:
Disruption in Emotion Component of Place-Identity and
Wellbeing” gained much attention in this cluster. Studies on the
role of place identity in regional development are prominent in
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 294
fpsyg-11-00294 March 7, 2020 Time: 16:26 # 9
Peng et al. Place Identity Meanings
TABLE 1 | Largest clusters of co-cited references.
Cluster ID Size Silhouette Average year Label (log-likelihood ratio, p-value)
0 31 0.881 2008 Place identity (788.36, 1.0 × 10−4)
1 25 0.925 2007 Place promotion (473.96, 1.0 × 10−4)
2 21 0.884 2003 Sonic geography (483.58, 1.0 × 10−4)
3 17 0.994 2013 Natural disaster (397.53, 1.0 × 10−4)
4 17 0.963 2010 Regional development (609.67, 1.0 × 10−4)
5 13 0.952 2003 Place memory (352.53, 1.0 × 10−4)
6 7 0.988 2012 Exploring residents’ attitude (125.06, 1.0 × 10−4)
FIGURE 7 | A timeline visualization for the clusters between 1985 and 2019. New developments since 2010 are notably associated with cluster #3, #6, and #4.
cluster #4. Place identity may play a driver or a barrier to regional
development. Graphic symbols, landscape features, discourses,
rurality, and other place components can be employed as identity
TABLE 2 | Articles that cite over 10% of members of each cluster.
Cluster ID Coverage % Citing articles
0 19 Fresque-Baxter and Armitage, 2012
0 19 Hernández et al., 2010
0 13 Vidal et al., 2013
1 16 Zimmerbauer, 2011
1 12 Vainikka, 2012
1 12 Zimmerbauer et al., 2012
2 24 Boland, 2010
2 19 Simon et al., 2010
3 24 Knez et al., 2018a
3 24 Knez et al., 2018b
4 53 Semian and Chromy, 2014
5 38 Lewicka, 2008
5 15 Chow and Healey, 2008
6 29 Bradley, 2017
6 29 Wheeler, 2015
instruments for place marketing and local development. Yet, the
mechanism underlying the role of place identity construction or
reconstruction in regional development is under-discussed and
needs more study eﬀorts.
Representative citing articles of cluster #5 suggest a thematic
concentration on the eﬀects of socio-spatial environment
(change) on place identity. The term “place memory” for the
cluster label appears in the title of a top citing article (Lewicka,
2008). The shaping of memory depends on many socio-spatial
environment factors, such as history, culture, architecture, and
family, which overlap the components shaping place identity. The
transition or new development of a socio-spatial environment,
for instance, undergraduates making the transition from home
to university, can disrupt pre-existing memory and emotional
attachments to a place and threaten place identity processes. The
smallest cluster, #6, includes seven member references. Cluster #6
pays special attention to the relationship between place identity
and residents’ attitudes, especially the attitudes toward spatial
planning or human intervention in places.
Apart from the diﬀerence in thematic concentrations, these
seven clusters also diﬀer in the foundation of the meaning
of place identity upon which the citing articles are based. In
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 294
fpsyg-11-00294 March 7, 2020 Time: 16:26 # 10
Peng et al. Place Identity Meanings
Table 2, representative citing articles of cluster #0, cluster #3,
and cluster #5 conceive place identity as an individual’s sub-
identity. Those of cluster #1, cluster #2, and cluster #4 generally
deem place identity as a social construct that diﬀerentiates a
place from other places. However, place identity in the article
by Zimmerbauer (2011) in cluster #1 is understood more in
terms of regional consciousness and a sense of belonging to
a region; a similar understanding can be found in the citing
article by Miloslav (2018) in cluster #4. Some citing articles, for
instance, Antonsich (2010) in cluster #2 and Semian and Chromy
(2014) and Melnychuk and Gnatiuk (2018) in cluster #4, advocate
the co-existence of the two intertwined and complementary
meanings of place identity. The two representative citing articles
of cluster #6 do not share the same view on the meaning of
place identity. Wheeler (2015) adopted a similar meaning as
that of cluster #1, cluster #2, or cluster #4. In the article by
Bradley (2017), the meaning of place identity as a human’s sub-
identity seems mixed with that as features of a place. Though
versatile meanings of place identity are used in diﬀerent clusters
or even in articles of a single cluster, they are not isolated
and hence are sometimes intertwined in shaping the knowledge
base of thematic concentrations. For example, Stedman’s (2002)
article titled “Toward a Social Psychology of Place: Predicting
Behavior From Place-Based Cognitions, Attitude, and Identity, ”
which has a betweenness centrality score of 0.11 and the most-
cited frequency in cluster #5, is also co-cited in cluster #0
and cluster #2.
The extensive applications of place identity in various topics
and the complex connections between its meanings in articles
or thematic clusters have strengthened the necessity of in-
depth examination on its fundamental meanings. Indeed, such
necessity has already been responded to in the academic world,
which is revealed by our citation burst analysis. A citation
burst is a phenomenon where an article is highly cited at
an increasingly faster rate. It indicates the likelihood that the
scientiﬁc community has paid or is paying special attention
toward the underlying contribution of these cited articles (Chen
et al., 2014a,b). The top ﬁve cited references with the strongest
citation bursts associated with Figure 7 are listed in Figure 8 ,
out of which Dixon and Durrheim (2000) is in cluster #5,
Lewicka (2011) in cluster #0, Scannell and Giﬀord (2010) in
cluster #6, Cresswell (2004) in cluster #2, and Amin (2004) in
cluster #1. Dixon and Durrheim’s (2000) article titled “Displacing
Place-Identity: A Discursive Approach to Locating Self and
Other, ” has the strongest citation burst, with a burst strength of
4.55. This article, published inBritish Journal of Social Psychology,
presented a sympathetic but critical evaluation (review) of
research on place identity. The beginning year of the citation
burst of this article is 2006, which coincides with the time when
the acceleration of publications on place identity took oﬀ (see
Figure 1). The articles by Amin (2004) and by Cresswell (2004),
both of which elaborated the concept of place, attracted great
attention in studies on place identity from 2008 to 2012. The latest
citation bursts are the remaining two review articles published in
the Journal of Environmental Psychology by Scannell and Giﬀord
(2010) and Lewicka (2011) on place attachment, in which its
relation with place identity is discussed. From the evolvement of
these top ﬁve busts, we can see that the fundamental meanings
of place identity have been widely of concern in studies in this
ﬁeld. Articles focusing on reviewing or elucidating the meanings
of place, place identity, and other place-related concepts have
gotten critical attention. The attempts to ﬁt together the versatile
meanings of place identity have witnessed increasing diﬃculties,
as the meanings of place, other place-based concepts, and their
confusing interrelations have been developing.
MEASURING METHODS AND ROLES OF
PLACE IDENTITY
Our scientometric survey has revealed the intellectual structure
of the research landscape relevant to place identity. However,
there are still some key issues about place identity research that
this methodology seems unable to answer. For example, how
has place identity been measured in the literature? What are the
roles of place identity that have been identiﬁed? The method to
measure or reveal place identity can be most scholars’ primary
concern when they propose questions in this domain. The roles
of place identity in relation either to people or to regions have
long been debated (see cluster #0, cluster #4), yet no universal
agreement has been reached. In this section, we reviewed these
two essential issues by further examining the contents of articles
on place identity.
Measuring Place Identity
People’s Place Identity
As a subjective and enigmatic social construct, place
identity is seldom engaged in individuals’ daily thoughts
FIGURE 8 | Top ﬁve references with the strongest citation bursts during 1985–2019. The red line segment indicates the beginning year and the ending year of the
duration of the burst.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 10 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 294
fpsyg-11-00294 March 7, 2020 Time: 16:26 # 11
Peng et al. Place Identity Meanings
and communications. People do not become aware of place
identity until their sense of place is threatened (Proshansky et al.,
1983). Individuals’ lack of self-awareness of place identity has not
discouraged researches on place identity assessment. It is shown
in plenty of articles that place identity can be measured either
qualitatively or quantitatively.
As witnessed in the citing articles of cluster #3 and cluster
#5, changes or interventions in living environment usually oﬀer
good opportunities for researchers to investigate the aﬀected
individuals’ place identity. Chow and Healey (2008) interviewed
10 students twice over a 5-month period to assess the extent of
changes in their place identities. These students had relocated
from their homes to university. After the hurricane Hugo in
September 1989, Hull et al. (1994) interviewed the residents
of Charleston by telephone about the meanings associated
with physical features damaged or lost due to Hugo. The
authors argued that the meaning and values symbolized by
place features or place icons play a role in the formation
of place identity.
Rank ordering of place-related self-categorizations is widely
used to assess place identity in many countries. The top
citing article of cluster #5 (Lewicka, 2008) applied this
instrument in a study on memory of residence places and
its relationship with place identity and place attachment.
Participants in the study were asked to rank three objects
out of a list of possible places of identiﬁcation, which include
city district, city, region, country, Europe, the world, and
ﬁnally, a human being.
A lot of studies rely on a Likert scale to assess individuals’
place identity (Kyle et al., 2004; Williams and Roggenbuck, 1989;
White et al., 2008). In many cases, these Likert-scaled items
are measured on a ﬁve-point strongly agree to strongly disagree
response scale. Typical items include “the place means a lot to
me, ” “I am very attached to the place, ” “I identify strongly with
this place, ” “I have a special connection to the place and the people
who live and visit there, ” and so forth. In some studies, such
items are measured with a seven-point scale. Carrus et al. (2005)
measured regional identity with 16 items on a seven-point Likert
scale. The authors divided the items into two categories, regional
pride and regional empowerment. In a citing article in cluster
#3 by Knez et al. (2018a,b), the 10 statements to measure place
identity are also divided into two categories, namely, emotion
and cognition components, and responded to by participants on
a seven-point scale.
Some studies have made attempts to measure place identity
with a single question. Pretty et al. (2003) asked for residents’
responses to a statement to test their identiﬁcation with their
residential community. The statement was designed as, “I
would really rather live in a diﬀerent town. This one is
not the place for me” (p. 275). The authors argued that
“one’s town is not the place ‘for me’ is to suggest that
one’s town is not constituted as part of one’s self-identity”
(p. 275). Respondents who agreed with the statement were
classiﬁed into a group with low community identity. Those who
disagreed were classiﬁed into a group with high community
identity. The community identity of undecided respondents was
deemed undecided.
Place Identity of a Place
Scholars tend to use “strong” or “weak” to depict the intensiveness
of people’s perception of the place identity of a certain area. In
this sense, there can be a scale to measure the intensity of place
identity. However, such a scale has not yet been unanimously
agreed on in practice. Various methods have been adopted in
literature to trace identities of places.
Approaches in literature to depict and measure place identity
focus generally on what the identity is and how it is constructed
by diﬀerent social actors. Vainikka (2012), a representative citing
article in cluster #1, used focus-group interviews to scrutinize to
what extent place identities are shaped and shared by citizens.
The author found that place identities perceived by citizens
often diﬀer from the identity discourses produced by media,
regional administrations, and others. Haartsen et al. (2003)
proposed a method to assess the rural identity perceived by
residents of diﬀerent age groups in the Netherlands. They asked
the respondents to give the four words or phrases that ﬁrst
come to their minds when thinking about the countryside.
The answers were aggregated into three categories: (1) a socio-
economic functional image base (“how rural areas work”),
(2) a visual–ﬁgurative image base (“what rural areas look
like”), and (3) a socio-cultural image base (“what rural areas
mean”). Elderly people were inclined to have a more socio-
cultural representation of rurality, whereas younger people often
characterized the countryside as an agricultural production zone.
Similarly, place identity is divided into three interpretative
dimensions, strategic, cultural, and functional, in the article by
Van Houtum and Lagendijk (2001). This division was applied
as a place identity analysis framework in two regions with
comparable economic conditions and urban structures. The
authors captioned each identity dimension of the two regions
and elaborated with facts and historical narratives on how that
identity was constructed.
As discussed previously about the thematic focus of cluster
#2, extracting place identity components from texts, discourses,
and narratives about an area is widely used by studies in
this domain. Ritalahti (2008) searched and analyzed the web
pages of individual tourism enterprises, municipalities, and
other actors, in order to get a holistic view of how the
identity of the study area is described there. The author
did the same analysis in neighboring areas to detect possible
boundaries created with place identities by social actors between
these areas. Visitors’ perceptions of the study area were then
compared with the place identities ascribed by the tourism
actors. Brace (1999) examined the identities of Cotswolds and
the larger England in ﬁctional and non-ﬁctional rural writing,
topographical writing, guidebooks, magazines, and articles.
Other publicly available materials in relation to place identity,
such as advertisements, were analyzed by researchers as well.
Keegstra (2009) collected the pictures in advertisements on
websites from diﬀerent social actors in the Loire valley in France.
The author identiﬁed diﬀerent identities ascribed by diﬀerent
groups, including tourist organizations, farmer organizations,
and governments.
Some research uses photos to measure how people perceive
a place. This instrument is generally applied in two kinds
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 11 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 294
fpsyg-11-00294 March 7, 2020 Time: 16:26 # 12
Peng et al. Place Identity Meanings
of approaches. In the ﬁrst approach, researchers take photos
and present them to respondents (Van den Berg, 1999). Buijs
et al. (2009) asked respondents to assess full-color pictures
of 10 typical and non-urban Dutch landscapes to analyze the
cultural diﬀerences in landscape perceptions in the Netherlands.
Each picture was scored on a 10-point scale, ranging from 1
(not attractive at all) to 10 (extremely attractive). Hawthorne
et al. (2008) applied a similar approach to examine residents’
perceptions of land use in their neighborhood. The participants
were asked to rank 19 pictures related to trail development
and explain why they ranked them in that way, which was
intended to understand the image of the neighborhood in
residents’ mind. In the second approach, researchers asked
participants to take photos that they think can represent the
identities of a place. Stewart et al. (2004) used this “photo-
elicitation” method to map residents’ visions of their community.
Twenty participants took photographs of community landscapes
and were interviewed while viewing their photographs. The
interview texts about meanings of the environments were
analyzed and grouped.
In addition to texts (discourse or narrative) and photos, other
identity indicators, known as identity markers, are also explored
extensively to reﬂect the distinctive identities of a place. Such
identity markers include buildings, street symbols, landscape,
cultural traditions, region names, dialects, dressing, and so forth,
most of which can be found in the citing and cited articles of
cluster #2, cluster #4, and cluster #6. Saleh (1998) argued that
citizens recognize their places, to some extent, by the prominent
traditional structures in the built environment. They examined
the role of the various kinds of towers in constructing the
identity of Saudi. Peterson (1988) noted that “people perceive
places diﬀerently and diﬀerentiate between them by drawing on
key physical features, cultural attributes, historical associations,
experiential ties” (p. 451). He explored the place identity of
Tucson and Albuquerque by analyzing thousands of commercial
and non-commercial establishment names listed in the telephone
directory. Nogué and Vicente (2004) suggested that landscape
is the cultural projection of a society on a place and acts as a
center of meaning and symbolism, and is a fundamental element
in the constructing process of a territorial identity. They analyzed
the role of landscape in the creation of national identity in
Catalonia. Simon et al. (2010) argued that names of regions
are essential symbols of place identities, and they connect the
image of regions with people’s regional consciousness. Social
actors may try to improve the identity of a place by giving it a
new name that can be associated with a positive image of the
place. The authors traced and counted the names of regions
in the Netherlands in the period 1950–2000 for an analysis of
change in Dutch place identity. Wheeler (2015) investigated how
wind farms are perceived by local residents as a reference to
rural place identity.
Roles of Place Identity
People’s Place Identity
People’s place identity is individuals’ strong emotional bonds to
particular places or environments (Fresque-Baxter and Armitage,
2012; Zimmerbauer et al., 2012; Melnychuk and Gnatiuk, 2018).
It inﬂuences the way we look, see, think, and feel in our
interaction with the physical world. Proshansky et al. (1983)
has been frequently cited in the clusters that concentrate on
people’s place identity, such as cluster #0, cluster #3, and cluster
#5 (Chow and Healey, 2008; White et al., 2008; Devine-Wright,
2009; Devine-Wright and Clayton, 2010; Hernández et al., 2010;
Fresque-Baxter and Armitage, 2012; Lengen and Kistemann,
2012; Urquhart and Acott, 2013). In this article, the authors
initially depicted that place identity has ﬁve core functions:
recognition, meaning, expressive-requirement, mediating change,
and anxiety and defense function. The recognition function
implies that individuals may adapt to and derive satisfaction
from the settings where they spend a while. The meaning
function proposes that place identity is the source of meaning
for a given setting because of the cognitions that enable the
person recognize a setting and understand its purposes. The
expressive-requirement function involves two types of place
identity cognitions, of which one is a cluster of cognitions
that expresses the tastes and preferences of the person and
the other represents what spaces and places require as far
their purposes are concerned. The mediating change function
indicates those place identity cognitions that serve to mediate
change in discrepancies between a person’s place identity and
the characteristics of an immediate physical setting. The anxiety
and defense function refers to those place identity cognitions
that may signal threat or danger in physical settings or may
represent response tendencies that defend or protect the person
against these dangers.
There are many other eﬀorts to explore the roles of place
identity. For example, Fresque-Baxter and Armitage (2012), a
representative citing article of cluster #0, summarized three
conceptual approaches to analyze the role of place identity in
climate change adaption. The ﬁrst approach is the cognitive–
behavioral approach, which examines how place identity
inﬂuences individual decision making from risk perception to
intention to action. The second one is the health and well-
being approach, which emphasizes the importance of place
identity in individuals’ emotional, mental, and spiritual well-
being. The third one is the collective action approach, which
examines the role of place identity in shaping values at a collective
level and opportunities for and/or barriers to collective action.
However, within the literature, the functions of place identity
articulated by Proshansky et al. (1983) or others are seldom
systematically testiﬁed or reﬁned in empirical studies. In some
occasions, part of these functions may match or relate to the
assumptions or conclusions of a few studies, either because
these functions are deﬁned inclusively or because they ﬁt well
with the real world.
Among empirical studies on place identity, most of them
have demonstrated its positive eﬀects, which include preventing
negative environmental perceptions, providing support for public
land use policies, strengthening the commitment of residents
to improve their homes and neighborhoods, and so forth. By
examining the eﬀects of nationalism and local identity upon
perception of beach pollution, Bonaiuto et al. (1996) found
that identiﬁcation with a town or nation prevents people’s
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 12 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 294
fpsyg-11-00294 March 7, 2020 Time: 16:26 # 13
Peng et al. Place Identity Meanings
negative physical assessments of pollution, which is interpreted
as a strategy used to cope with the threat by an outgroup to
place identity. Low and Altman (1992) identiﬁed “satisfaction”
as part of the merits of people’s aﬀective bonds with places
because “places permit control, foster creativity and provide
opportunities for privacy, security and serenity” (Chow and
Healey, 2008). Kyle et al. (2003) found that when visitors’
place identity increases, their support for paying fees for
recreational use increases as well. Uzzell et al. (2002) argued
that place identity can positively predict environmentally friendly
conduct. Brown et al. (2003) found that the commitment
of neighbors to improve their own home and the whole
neighborhood is positively related to the emotional connection
they have developed to the place. Carrus et al. (2005)
also detected a positive role of place identity in predicting
support for the protection of nature areas. Manzo and Perkins
(2006) argued that particular preferences, perceptions, and
emotional connections to places relate to community social
cohesion, organized participation, and community development.
Hernández et al. (2010) found that place identity positively
inﬂuences environmental attitude and injunctive social norms.
Knez et al. (2018b) found a positive relationship between place
identity and perception of naturalness.
A few articles have also pointed out that the strong emotional
bonds between individuals and particular places may have a
less positive role. As place identity is a dynamic and dialectic
process, in some occasions, it may act as resistance factors that
are latent in man’s mind. Manzo and Perkins (2006) argued that
if people’s emotional responses to a place are not acknowledged
and understood, they can be divided and immobilized by their
anxieties. Forester (1987) pointed out that bonds with a place
can form the basis for cooperation and community action,
and they can also lie at the root of community conﬂict. Both
Stoll-Kleemann (2001) and Bonaiuto et al. (2002) suggested
that local residents would oppose the designation of protected
nature areas if a strong sense of identiﬁcation with their local
community is present.
Place Identity of a Place
It is widely accepted and also revealed in cluster #4 and cluster #1
that place identity is closely related with regional development.
Paasi (2009b) argued that a strong place identity is a remarkable
resource in regional development. Place identity is the image
inhabitants hold of the home area, and the embodiment of such
an image in regional development activities encourages people’s
creativity and entrepreneurship. Semian and Chromy (2014), the
top citing article of cluster #4, shared Paasi’s conceptualization of
place identity and argued that place identity can play a positive
or negative role in regional development. Terluin (2003) did
not mention place identity as a determinant of leading and
lagging EU regions, but she believed that strong and leading
actors’ capacity is vital for regional development in building
a strong place identity, which can facilitate the mobilizing
of the self-help capacity, foster co-operation, and help turn
handicaps into development assets. Taking EU as an illustrative
case, Paasi (2009b) pointed out that the emotional aspects of
civil society are increasingly recognized in the cohesion policy
of the EU, and place identity has become an instrument for
promoting regional development. The role of place identity as
a tool to promote regional cooperation and possibly regional
integration has been witnessed in East Asian as well (Terada,
2003). However, place identity is broadly considered as an
inherently imprecise and fuzzy notion, and the mechanism
about how place identity aﬀects regional development is laden
with social and productive magic (Hurrell, 1995; Paasi, 2003).
Though social actors’ commitment to enhancing place identity,
and subsequently, regional development, is widely acknowledged,
the principles behind such contribution have seldom been proven
(Terluin, 2003). There is a long way ahead for scholars to
identify how and to what extent place identity can promote
regional growth.
Numerous studies on place identity have stressed its
intrinsic nature of resistance to globalization in the process of
regional development, which responds to our previous keyword
burst analysis, where globalization and countermeasures are
highlighted as hot topics (Paasi, 2002c, 2003; Van Rekom and
Go, 2006). Globalization can be deﬁned as the intensiﬁcation
of economic, political, social, and cultural relations across
borders, while regionalization is the growth of societal integration
within the border of a given region (Kacowicz, 1999). A region
is established in the regionalization process, maturing with
people’s consciousness of place identity that diﬀerentiates it
from others. While increasingly fast globalization is threatening
the genuineness of regions, place identities stand to maintain
regional distinctiveness. This plausible contention can be
greatly found in research about tourism and place identity.
Dredge and Jenkins (2003) argued that globalizing forces
have contributed to increased homogenization of tourism
products. Local destination identity has been associated with
perceptions of homogeneity. Destinations are under increasing
pressure to construct and promote distinct identities in order
to counterbalance these homogenizing inﬂuences and pursue
tourism growth. Gospodini (2004) suggested that built heritage
and innovative design may work as place identity generators in
modern and post-modern European urban societies. They can
promote tourism and create social solidarity among inhabitants,
and subsequently defend against the place identity crisis in the
processes of economic and cultural globalization. While the
preservation of place identity can attract tourists, it puts the
place at a risk of exposure to globalization forces. However,
economic success brought by tourism may stimulate the place
to maintain its identities that are discovered by tourists
(Van Rekom and Go, 2006).
Besides the role in maintaining a place, place identity has
also become a slogan for making a place, which is also referred
to in our previous keyword burst analysis (Paasi, 2009b). For
one, an established place identity shared by common social
stakeholders forms structures of expectations, which can be used
as a collective mobilizing force (Terluin, 2003; Knapp, 2006). For
another, discourses on place identity, which embody social actors’
interests and expectations, may create the reality that they are
describing and generate action when the reality is accepted by the
public (Paasi, 2002a). Politicians and policy makers have been,
for a long time, exploiting place identity narratives in planning to
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 13 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 294
fpsyg-11-00294 March 7, 2020 Time: 16:26 # 14
Peng et al. Place Identity Meanings
lead place-making (Paasi, 2009b). Saleh (1998) argued that place
identity is an important factor to mobilize people, which explains
planners’ enthusiasm for its introduction and application. Stewart
et al. (2004) suggested that place identity has the potential to serve
as visions for planning processes. The involvement of citizens’
thoughts on what the identity of a place is and should be forms
part of the visioning process in planning. Hague and Jenkins
(2005, p. 8) deemed planning to be about place-making, which
means one of the signiﬁcant objects of planning is to “create,
reproduce or mold the identities of places through manipulation
of the activities, feelings, meanings and fabric that combine
into place identity, ” Moreover, place-making needs planners to
incorporate visions of place identity not only from politicians’
and economic interests but also from local residents and other
members of civil society, because identities ascribed to a place
by diﬀerent stakeholders are contested and may play a potential
role in social conﬂicts (Bridger, 1996; Haartsen et al., 2000;
Stewart et al., 2004).
DISCUSSION
Place identity is gradually preferred by geographers to preach
in extensive occasions, such as planning, regional regeneration,
heritage conservation, landscape appreciation, tourism,
environmental management, environmental behavior, local
conﬂict, and so on. Researchers involve place identity in so
many diverse contexts that this term is endowed with increasing
explanations and connotations. The broad use of place identity
makes it like a panacea to deal with problems of the relationship
between a place and people. Although the meanings of place
identity have not been unanimously agreed upon to date, it
is undoubtedly positive that “place identity” has acted as an
outlet to integrate physical reality and social cognition. When
we begin to become aware of the complexity and chaos in place
management issues, the object-oriented strategy-making process
fades out of its dominant popularity in place-making. As a
traditional top–down policy-making approach tends to meet
resistance in the late policy implementation phase, increasing
attention has been paid to information and knowledge from the
grassroots and stakeholders. Participatory planning has been
introduced, and a great deal of consultancy work is launched
before decision making. To do that, we aim at digging about
what and how people think of the place where they live or that
they care about. People’s perception of a place derives from direct
or indirect contact with the place. They ascribe identities to a
place based not only on objective physical features but also on
less tangible meanings, memories, and information from others,
from the past and the future.
One of the essential prerequisites to make a place is to cater
to its owners’ or users’ thoughts and requests. The rising of
inhabitants’ versatile requests on places drives us to contemplate
place management issues as an integration of complexity. We
want to modernize our place with global leading technologies,
yet we are afraid of losing its historical traces. We need wide
roads to improve traﬃc and larger cities to accommodate more
population and buildings, yet we are reluctant to sacriﬁce limited
farmland and natural landscape, which preserve rural identity.
Such dilemmas or conﬂicts in place development are realities, and
we cannot tackle them within a single sector or discipline. Place
identity can be a solution to integrate those issues (Pinto, 2000).
However, when we come to this approach, we may encounter
another risk. Since the components of place identity are too broad
and inclusive to operate, pursuers of place identity are sometimes
frustrated by its vague meaning. In a lot of studies, researchers
try to avoid in-depth debate on the conception of place identity
when they investigate identities of a case area. Instead, they lean
on previous relevant studies and extend those deﬁnitions and
methodologies in their own ways.
People’s place identity and the place identity of a place overlap
but are not the same. Both constructs embody subjective or
emotional bonds between man and the physical world. People’s
place identity is part of individuals’ personalities related to
places that are signiﬁcant in the formation of their identities.
Place identity of a place is the personality of the place. Such
personality is, in most occasions, ascribed by people to the place
where they live or that they care about. As shown in Figure 9,
through people’s interaction with a place, the place inﬂuences
and subsequently constitutes people’s social (collective) and
personal (individual) identity (Nario-Redmond et al., 2004).
Meanwhile, people perceive and construct the identity of a place.
Although the identity of a place is reﬂected through people’s
consciousness, which is generated mostly by man’s nervous
system, it originates from the physical, symbolic, institutional,
and other components of the place (Raagmaa, 2002). Any
changes in these components, deduced either by external forces
(e.g., natural disaster, spatial planning, globalization) or internal
growth (e.g., regional development or promotion) would impact
the identity of a place and its inhabitants’ place identities. As the
interaction between people and a place is a mutual, dynamic,
and eternal process, the creating and fostering of place identity
is also a mutual, dynamic, and circular process (see Figure 9 )
(Ramos et al., 2016).
Generally, the eﬀorts to promote the identity of a place can
enhance its inhabitants’ place identities at the same time, and
vice versa. The intricate relationships between people, place,
and place identity occasionally confuse researchers who try
to deconstruct the meanings of place identity. For example,
Yuen (2005) cited Proshanky’s deﬁnition to conceive place
identity as a “substructure of self-identity.” However, most
of the arguments in his article concentrate on the increasing
emphasis that Singapore has given to urban conservation as
a way to strengthen the identity of the city. Paasi’s theory on
the formation of a region and its identity is applied in the
research by Raagmaa (2002). The measurement of place identity
Raagmaa designed is biased to examine residents’ identiﬁcation
with their communities. We need place identity as a term to
integrate complex physical reality and social cognition, but we
do not expect a vague meaning of this term to be widespread in
various domains.
Place identity is more than spatial consciousness. Place
identity is claimed as a social construction based on physical
reality, but we cannot overlook the objective components and
qualities of places and people, which also form part of their
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 14 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 294
fpsyg-11-00294 March 7, 2020 Time: 16:26 # 15
Peng et al. Place Identity Meanings
FIGURE 9 | Relationships between people, place, and place identity.
identities. We can easily tell a mountain from a lake not because
we ascribe high altitude to the mountain or water to the lake but
because of the reality that a mountain is high and a lake has water.
To explain the meanings of place identity, Paasi (2002c, p.38)
draws a diagram showing the connections of the dimensions of
place identity. Inspired by Paasi’s work, the social and personal
identity theories, and other attempts to identify contents and
dimensions of place-related identity (Nario-Redmond et al., 2004;
Stobbelaar and Pedrol, 2011; Ramos et al., 2016), we summarized
four major dimensions of the meanings of place identity (see
Figure 10).
To study people’s place identity or the place identity of
a place, the literature generally analyzes them through two
perspectives: external looks or internal thoughts. From external
looks, researchers observe people’s physical appearances and
behaviors associated with a place. How a group of people looks
and behaves is thought to be a direct indicator separating
this group from others. People’s dress, hair, skin, dialect, diet,
and other behaviors are inherited to a great extent. In other
words, these characteristics lean on local traditions and genetic
inheritance, which have roots in a place. People who have
migrated to a new place would keep these origins for a long time.
Therefore, the external looks of these characteristics constitute
part of people’s public self-identity imprinted by the place where
they or their ancestors come from.
As to the external looks of a place, we tend to locate the place
on a map at the very beginning. The boundary on the map oﬀers
a concrete geographic position and extension of the place for
people to identify it in the world. Other tangible elements of
a place, such as place names, buildings, land use, population,
landscape, landmarks, governments, culture, organizations, and
so on, deﬁne the external looks of this place together. According
to Paasi’s (1986) view on the formation of a region, these
elements can be generally grouped into three categories, which
are known as physical shape, symbolic shape, and institutional
shape. In instructions of a place, one or more of these tangible
elements are usually narrated as components that make up the
identities of that place.
From the perspective of internal thoughts, researchers strive
to design methods to explore subjective connections between
people and places. When scientists carry out empirical studies
from this view, there is a subtle diﬀerence between the methods
to measure people’s place identity and the place identity of a
place. Respondents are usually asked how they perceive a given
place or places in both cases. However, in the case of studying
people’s place identity, researchers’ aim emphasizes especially
on the meanings and importance of the place(s) people feel in
their lives. To attain that, investigations revolve mainly around
questions about people’s attitudes and feelings related to a place.
Such attitudes are usually value-oriented, such as love for a
country, and landscape preferences, which indicate the role of a
place in the formation of a belief or standards that guide people’s
choices. The feelings can be considered as aﬀect-oriented, which
indicates the internalized manifestations of the eﬀects of a place
(or elements of a place), such as the importance of elements of
a place to the self, and the identiﬁcation with places of diﬀerent
spatial scales. It is necessary to point out that people living
outside of a place are seldom included in this case, because those
who have no contacts with the place can hardly perceive the
importance of the place in shaping their personality. People’s
internal thoughts that reveal their bonds with a place constitute
part of their private self-identity imprinted by the place.
With respect to internal thoughts about the place identity of a
place, researchers’ major eﬀorts focus on the images of a place
people hold in their minds. Such images can be perceived by
people living either inside or outside of a place (Paasi, 1986,
2002c). In academic studies and spatial policy-making practices,
both collective and individual perceptions of place identities have
been paid much attention. Individuals seldom encounter oﬃcial
boundary lines or marks of places in daily life. They often perceive
the existence and extent of a place in mind according to the
elements of the external looks of the place. From this point,
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 15 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 294
fpsyg-11-00294 March 7, 2020 Time: 16:26 # 16
Peng et al. Place Identity Meanings
External looks Internal thoughts
People
Physical appearance (e.g., dress, hair, skin);
Behavior (e.g., dialect, diet, traditional 
practice, skill)
Attitude (e.g., patriot, goal, preference);
Feeling (e.g., importance of elements of a 
place to self, identification with places of 
different spatial scales)
Place
Physical shape (e.g., territory, landscape, 
building, land use); 
Symbolic shape (e.g., landmark, dialect, 
name of the place, boundary on the map); 
Institutional shape (e.g., government, firm,
neighbourhood)
Individual perception (e.g., place boundary 
in mind, representative elements of a place 
in mind, holistic image of a place);
Collective perception (e.g., place marketing, 
discourse about a place)
FIGURE 10 | Quadrantal dimensions of the meanings of place identity.
researchers examine the boundary of a place in individuals’ minds
to study the intensity of the perceptions of place identity. Besides,
individuals bear in mind diﬀerent representative elements and
holistic images of a place, which forms the competitive nature
of place identities and becomes the central research interest in
this domain. The elements and images of a place in leading social
actors’ minds are always shown in place marketing or planning
media, discourses, and narratives, with the intention to present
to the world what the identity of the place is. In some occasions,
the place identity constructed by leading social actors may not be
consistent with the place identity perceived by the public, but it
may be gradually accepted as the collective place identity through
spatial planning, place development, or promotion.
CONCLUSION
On the base of the bibliographic records in the core data set of
Web of Science related to place identity, this paper identiﬁed
active research topics and new developments in place identity
with a scientometric analysis. An extended survey on measuring
methods and roles of place identity in the contents of academic
articles was done to supplement the scientometric approach.
Distinctions and interrelations between the two meanings of
place identity were highlighted with respect to intellectual base,
thematic concentration, measurement, and function. Although
this paper tried to separate place identity of a place and people’s
place identity in multi respects, there are a lot of subtle similarities
between their attributes. Both of them are contested, and both
are attached with signiﬁcance in place development, planning,
and social conﬂicts. Similarities also exit in the methods to
study them. The establishment or intensity of the identity of a
place is often examined by asking about people’s identiﬁcation
with the place. Such similarities could be greater if additional
eﬀorts are made to look into the cross-cited articles between
the clusters generated by our scientometric analysis. Longtime
ignorance of the mixed uses of the two meanings in the
literature, in addition to their confusing relationships with other
environmental psychological concepts, such as place attachment,
has led to a lot of criticism, which can also be blamed for the slow
progress in the development of place identity theory.
The quadrantal dimensions of the meanings of place identity
presented in this paper are expected to help scholars ﬁnd their
positions when they are involved in research questions in this
domain. Place and people are interdependent. Although people’s
place identity and place identity of a place are not the same,
we did not mean to stress their diﬀerences and encourage
separated studies on either of them. Instead, places, people,
and processes through which both identities are formed should
be taken in a comprehensive structure that is supported by a
set of theory-grounded principles (Lewicka, 2011). The existing
theories relevant to place identity, as well as their interrelations,
within the top subject categories identiﬁed by our scientometric
analysis are not reviewed in this paper, but they are worthy
of future study.
To make places better in the contemporary world with
increasing mobility and globalization, place identity has been
gradually used as an instrument in various domains, such as
spatial planning, place marketing, and so forth. However, there
are still many outstanding key issues in this area. What should
be and how to establish the optimal identity of a speciﬁc place?
How to reconcile the optimal identity of a place with residents’
and other stakeholders’ place identities? How to measure the costs
and beneﬁts in terms of social capital, regional or community
resilience, and other human well-being or place growth-related
scales, of the transitional process of place identity? More
empirical studies are needed to ﬁgure out practical solutions
and principles for these issues. Otherwise, the research of place
identity will always ﬂoat in the air, so that policy makers and
relevant practitioners are not able to touch and operate this tool
in practice. Before answering the above questions, we suggest the
most fundamental task at present should be to straighten out the
diﬀerences between place identity and other concepts deﬁning
people’s emotional bonds with places and to sort out the basic
framework of place identity theory and its relationship with other
relevant theories.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 16 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 294
fpsyg-11-00294 March 7, 2020 Time: 16:26 # 17
Peng et al. Place Identity Meanings
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
JP collected and analyzed the data in the manuscript. JP wrote
the manuscript. DS introduced the idea and guided the revision
of the manuscript. QW oﬀered suggestions for the revision
of the manuscript.
FUNDING
This work was jointly funded by the National Natural Sciences
Foundation of China (No. 71403129), the National Social Science
Foundation of China (No. 17ZDA076), and the 111 Project in
China (No. B17024).
REFERENCES
Amin, A. (2004). Regions unbound: towards a new politics of place. Geograﬁska
Annaler. 86, 33–44. doi: 10.1111/j.0435-3684.2004.00152.x
Antonsich, M. (2010). Meanings of place and aspects of the self: an interdisciplinary
and empirical account. GeoJ. 75, 119–132. doi: 10.1007/s10708-009-9290-9
Basso, K. (1996). Wisdom Sits in Places: Landscape and Language Among the
Western Apache. New Mexico: University of New Mexico Press.
Billig, M. (1995). Banal Nationalism. London: Sage Publications.
Bleam, M. R. (2018). Unbounded place meanings and embodied place identities for
conservation volunteers in Scottsdale, Arizona. J. Environ. Psychol. 56, 76–83.
doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2018.03.002
Boland, P. (2010). Sonic geography, place and race in the formation of local
identity: liverpool and scousers. Geograﬁska Annaler. 92, 1–22. doi: 10.1111/j.
1468-0467.2010.00330.x
Bonaiuto, M., Breakwell, G. M., and Cano, I. (1996). Identity processes and
environmental threat: the eﬀects of nationalism and local identity upon
perception of beach pollution. J. Commun. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 6, 157–175.
doi: 10.1002/(sici)1099-1298(199608)6:3<157::aid-casp367>3.0.co;2-w
Bonaiuto, M., Carrus, G., Martorella, H., and Bonnes, M. (2002). Local identity
processes and environmental attitudes in land use changes: the case of natural
protected areas. J. Econ. Psychol. 23, 631–653. doi: 10.1016/S0167-4870(02)
00121-6
Brace, C. (1999). Finding England everywhere: regional identity and the
construction of national identity, 1890-1940. Ecumene 6, 90–109. doi: 10.1177/
096746089900600105
Bradley, Q. (2017). Neighbourhood planning and the impact of place identity
on housing development in England. Plann. Theory Pract. 18, 233–248. doi:
10.1080/14649357.2017.1297478
Bridger, J. C. (1996). Community imagery and the built environment.Sociol. Quart.
37, 353–374. doi: 10.2307/4121288
Brown, B., Perkins, D. D., and Brown, G. (2003). Place attachment in a revitalizing
neighborhood: individual and block levels of analysis. J. Environ. Psychol. 23,
259–271. doi: 10.1016/S0272-4944(02)00117-2
Buijs, A. E., Elands, B. H. M., and Langers, F. (2009). No wilderness for immigrants:
cultural diﬀerences in images of nature and landscape preferences. Landsc.
Urban Plann. 91, 113–123. doi: 10.1016/j.landurbplan.2008.12.003
Carrus, G., Bonaiuto, M., and Bonnes, M. (2005). Environmental concern, regional
identity, and support for protected areas in Italy. Environ. Behavior. 37, 237–
257. doi: 10.1177/0013916504269644
Chen, C., Dubin, R., and Kim, M. C. (2014a). Emerging trends and new
developments in regenerative medicine: a scientometric update (2000 – 2014).
Expert Opin. Biol. Therapy 14, 1295–1317. doi: 10.1517/14712598.2014.920813
Chen, C., Dubin, R., and Kim, M. C. (2014b). Orphan drugs and rare diseases: a
scientometric review (2000 – 2014). Expert Opin. Orphan Drugs 2, 709–724.
doi: 10.1517/21678707.2014.920251
Chow, K., and Healey, M. (2008). Place attachment and place identity: ﬁrst-year
undergraduates making the transition from home to university. J. Environ.
Psychol. 28, 362–372. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2008.02.011
Cresswell, T. (2004). Place: A Short Introduction. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Devine-Wright, P., and Lyons, E. (1997). Remembering pasts and representing
places: the construction of national identities in Ireland. J. Environ. Psychol. 17,
33–45. doi: 10.1006/jevp.1996.0037
Devine-Wright, P. (2009). Rethinking NIMBYism: the role of place attachment
and place identity in explaining place-protective action. J. Commun. Appl. Soc.
Psychol. 19, 426–441. doi: 10.1002/casp.1004
Devine-Wright, P., and Clayton, S. (2010). Introduction to the special issue: place,
identity and environmental behaviour. J. Environ. Psychol. 30, 267–270. doi:
10.1016/S0272-4944(10)00078-2
Dixon, J., and Durrheim, K. (2000). Displacing place-identity: a discursive
approach to locating self and other. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 39(Pt 1), 27–44. doi:
10.1348/014466600164318
Dredge, D., and Jenkins, J. (2003). Destination place identity and regional tourism
policy. Tourism Geograph. 5, 383–407. doi: 10.1080/1461668032000129137
Entrikin, J. N. (1991). The Betweenness of Place: Towards A Geography of
Modernity. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Forester, J. (1987). Planning in the face of conﬂict: negotiation and mediation
strategies in local land use regulation. J. Am. Plann. Assoc. 53, 303–314. doi:
10.1080/01944368708976450
Fresque-Baxter, J. A., and Armitage, D. (2012). Place identity and climate change
adaptation: a synthesis and framework for understanding. Wiley Interdiscipl.
Rev. Clim. Change. 3, 251–266. doi: 10.1002/wcc.164
Gieseking, J. J., Mangold, W., Katz, C., Low, S., and Saegert, S. (2014). The People,
Place, and Space Reader. New York, NY: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group.
Giuliani, M. V., and Feldman, R. (1993). Place attachment in a developmental and
cultural context. J. Environ. Psychol. 13, 267–274. doi: 10.1016/S0272-4944(05)
80179-3
Gospodini, A. (2004). Urban morphology and place identity in European cities:
built heritage and innovative design. J. Urban Design 9, 225–248. doi: 10.1080/
1357480042000227834
Groote, P., and Haartsen, T. (2008). “The communication of heritage: creating
place identities” in The Ashgate Research Companion to Heritage and Identity ,
eds B. Graham and P. Howard (Hampshire: Ashgate Publishing), 181–194.
Haartsen, T., Groote, P., and Huigen, P. P. P. (2000). Claiming Rural Identities:
Dynamics, Contexts, Policies. Assen: Van Gorcum.
Haartsen, T., Groote, P., and Huigen, P. P. P. (2003). Measuring age diﬀerentials
in representations of rurality in The Netherlands. J. Rural Stud. 19, 245–252.
doi: 10.1016/s0743-0167(02)00045-1
Hague, C., and Jenkins, P. (2005). Place Identity, Participation and Planning .
Oxfordshire: Routledge.
Hauge, A. L. (2007). Identity and place: a critical comparison of three identity
theories. Architect. Sci. Rev. 50, 44–51. doi: 10.3763/asre.2007.5007
Hawthorne, T., Krygier, J., and Kwan, M. P. (2008). Mapping ambivalence:
exploring the geographies of community change and rails-to-trails development
using photo-based Q method and PPGIS. Geoforum 39, 1058–1078. doi: 10.
1016/j.geoforum.2007.11.006
Hernández, B., Hidalgo, M. C., Salazar-Laplace, M. E., and Hess, S. (2007). Place
attachment and place identity in natives and non-natives. J. Environ. Psychol.
27, 310–319. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2007.06.003
Hernández, B., Martín, A. M., Ruiz, C., and Hidalgo, M. D. C. (2010). The role of
place identity and place attachment in breaking environmental protection laws.
J. Environ. Psychol. 30, 281–288. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2010.01.009
Huigen, P. P. P., and Meijering, L. (2005). “Making places: a story of the Venen, ” in
Senses of Place, Senses of Time, eds G. J. Ashworth and B. Graham (Burlington:
Ashgate), 19–30.
Hull, R. B., Lam, M., and Vigo, G. (1994). Place identity: symbols of self in the urban
fabric. Landsc. Urban Plann. 28, 109–120. doi: 10.1016/0169-2046(94)90001-9
Hurrell, A. (1995). “Regionalism in theoretical perspective, ” in Regionalism in
World Politics: Regional Organization and International Order , eds L. Fawcett
and A. Hurrell (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 37–73.
Jorgensen, B. S., and Stedman, R. C. (2001). Sense of place as an attitude: lakeshore
owners attitudes toward their properties. J. Environ. Psychol. 21, 233–248. doi:
10.1006/jevp.2001.0226
Kacowicz, A. M. (1999). Regionalization, globalization, and nationalism:
convergent, divergent, or overlapping? Alternat. Global Local Political. 24,
527–555. doi: 10.1111/1467-9701.00250
Keegstra, R. (2009). Representations of the Loire Valley. Master thesis, University of
Groningen, Groningen
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 17 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 294
fpsyg-11-00294 March 7, 2020 Time: 16:26 # 18
Peng et al. Place Identity Meanings
Knapp, W. (2006). “Planning in peri-urban regions: on regional identity
and organizing capacity, ” in Europe’s City-Regions Competitiveness: Growth
Regulation and Peri-Urban Land Management, eds N. Bertrand and V. Kreibich
(Assen: Uitgeverij Van Gorcum), 61–84.
Knez, I., Butler, A., Sang, Å. O., Ångman, E., Sarlöv-Herlinc, I., and Åkerskog, A.
(2018a). Before and after a natural disaster: disruption in emotion component
of place-identity and wellbeing. J. Environ. Psychol. 55, 11–17. doi: 10.1016/j.
jenvp.2017.11.002
Knez, I., Sang, Å. O., Gunnarsson, B., and Hedblom, M. (2018b). Wellbeing in
urban greenery: the role of naturalness and place identity. Front. Psychol. 9:491.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00491
Kyle, G. T., Absher, J. D., and Graefe, A. R. (2003). The moderating role of place
attachment on the relationship between attitudes toward fees and spending
preferences. Leisure Sci. 25, 33–50. doi: 10.1080/01490400306552
Kyle, G., Graefe, A., Manning, R., and Bacon, J. (2004). Eﬀects of place attachment
on users’ perceptions of social and environmental conditions in a natural
setting. J. Environ. Psychol. 24, 213–225. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2003.12.006
Lalli, M. (1992). Urban-related identity: theory, measurement, and empirical
ﬁndings. J. Environ. Psychol. 12, 285–303. doi: 10.1016/S0272-4944(05)80078-7
Lengen, C., and Kistemann, T. (2012). Sense of place and place identity:
review of neuroscientiﬁc evidence. Health Place 18, 1162–1171. doi: 10.1016/
j.healthplace.2012.01.012
Lewicka, M. (2008). Place attachment, place identity, and place memory: restoring
the forgotten city past. J. Environ. Psychol. 28, 209–231. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.
2008.02.001
Lewicka, M. (2010). What makes neighborhood diﬀerent from home and city?
Eﬀects of place scale on place attachment. J. Environ. Psychol. 30, 35–51. doi:
10.1016/j.jenvp.2009.05.004
Lewicka, M. (2011). Place attachment: how far have we come in the last 40 years?
J. Environ. Psychol. 31, 207–230. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2010.10.001
Low, S. M., and Altman, I. (1992). Place Attachment: A Conceptual Inquiry .
New York, NY: Plenum.
Manzo, L. C., and Perkins, D. D. (2006). Finding common ground: the importance
of place attachment to community participation and planning. J. Plann. Lit. 20,
335–350. doi: 10.1177/0885412205286160
Massey, D. (1994). Space, Place and Gender. Cambridge: Polity.
Massey, D. (1995). “The conceptualization of place, ” inA Place in the World, eds D.
Massey and P. Jess (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 45–85.
Melnychuk, A., and Gnatiuk, O. (2018). Regional identity and the renewal of spatial
administrative structures: the case of Podolia, Ukraine. Nephron Clin. Pract. 26,
42–54. doi: 10.2478/mgr-2018-0004
Miloslav, Š (2018). The regional identity of the inhabitants of regions which have
experienced an interrupted continuity in their socio-historical development.
A case study of Czech regions that were resettled after World War II. Geograﬁe
123, 437–459. doi: 10.37040/geograﬁe2018123040437
Nario-Redmond, M. R., Biernat, M., Eidelman, S., and Palenske, D. J. (2004). The
social and personal identities scale: a measure of the diﬀerential importance
ascribed to social and personal self-categorizations. Self Identity 3, 143–175.
doi: 10.1080/13576500342000103
Nogué, J., and Vicente, J. (2004). Landscape and national identity in Catalonia.
Political Geogr. 23, 113–132. doi: 10.1016/j.polgeo.2003.09.005
Paasi, A. (1986). The institutionalization of regions: a theoretical framework for
the understanding of the emergence of regions and the constitution of regional
identity. Fennia 164, 105–146. doi: 10.11143/9052
Paasi, A. (1991). Deconstructing regions: notes on the scales of spatial life.Environ.
Plann. A 23, 239–256. doi: 10.1068/a230239
Paasi, A. (1996). Territories, Boundaries and Consciousness. Chichester: Wiley.
Paasi, A. (2001). Europe as a social process and discourse: considerations of place,
boundaries and identity. Eur. Urban Regional Stud. 8, 7–28. doi: 10.1177/
096977640100800102
Paasi, A. (2002a). Bounded spaces in the mobile word: deconstructing ‘regional
identity’. Tijdschrift Voor Econ. Soc. Geograﬁe 93, 137–148. doi: 10.1111/1467-
9663.00190
Paasi, A. (2002b). Place and region: regional worlds and words.Progr. Hum. Geogr.
26, 802–811. doi: 10.1191/0309132502ph404pr
Paasi, A. (2002c). “Regional identities and the challenge of the mobile world, ” in
Kulturell Identitet og Regional Utvikling, ed. T. O. Engen (Elverum: Høgskolen
i Hedmark), 33–48.
Paasi, A. (2003). Region and place: regional identity in question.Progr. Hum. Geogr.
27, 475–485. doi: 10.1191/0309132503ph439pr
Paasi, A. (2004). Place and region: looking through the prism of scale. Progr. Hum.
Geogr. 28, 536–546. doi: 10.1191/0309132504ph502pr
Paasi, A. (2009a). “Regions and regional dynamics, ” in The SAGE Handbook of
European Studies , ed. C. Rumford (Los Angeles, CA: SAGE), 464–484. doi:
10.4135/9780857021045.n26
Paasi, A. (2009b). The resurgence of the ‘region’ and ‘regional identity’: theoretical
perspectives and empirical observations on regional dynamics in Europe. Rev.
Int. Stud. 35, 121–146. doi: 10.1017/S0260210509008456
Peterson, G. (1988). Local symbols and place identity: tucson and albuquerque.Soc.
Sci. J. 25, 451–461. doi: 10.1016/0362-3319(88)90024-9
Pinto, C. T. (2000). “Landscape identity, a key for integration, ” in Lebenscraum
Landschaft, ed. B. Pedroli (Rotterdam: Uitgeverij Christofoor), 145–149.
Pretty, G. H., Chipuer, H. M., and Bramston, P. (2003). Sense of place amongst
adolescents and adults in two rural Australian towns: the discriminating
features of place attachment, sense of community and place dependence in
relation to place identity. J. Environ. Psychol. 23, 273–287. doi: 10.1016/S0272-
4944(02)00079-8
Proshansky, H. M. (1976). Environmental Psychology: People and Their Physical
Setting. New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Proshansky, H. M. (1978). The city and self-identity. Environ. Behav. 10, 147–169.
doi: 10.1177/0013916578102002
Proshansky, H. M., and Fabian, A. K. (1987). “The development of place identity in
the child, ” inThe Built Environment and Child Development, eds C. S. Weinstein
and T. G. David (New York, NY: Plenum Press), 21–40.
Proshansky, H. M., Fabian, A. K., and Kaminoﬀ, R. (1983). Place-identity: physical
world socialization of the self. J. Environ. Psychol. 3, 57–83. doi: 10.1016/S0272-
4944(83)80021-8
Raagmaa, G. (2002). Regional identity in regional development and planning. Eur.
Plann. Stud. 10, 55–76. doi: 10.1080/09654310120099263
Relph, E. (1976). Place and Placelessness. London: Pion.
Rijnks, R. H., and Strijker, D. (2013). Spatial eﬀects on the image and identity of a
rural area. J. Environ. Psychol. 36, 103–111. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2013.07.008
Ritalahti, J. (2008). “Regional identity in destination development”, in Proceedings
of the Conference on Regional Development and Innovation Processes, 5-7 March,
Porvoo-Borga.
Rollero, C., and Piccoli, N. D. (2010). Does place attachment aﬀect social well-
being? Eur. Rev. Appl. Psychol. 60, 233–238. doi: 10.1016/j.erap.2010.05.001
Ramos, I. L., Bernardo, F., Ribeiro, S. C., and Van Eetvelde, V. (2016). Landscape
identity: implications for policy making. Land Use Policy 53, 36–43. doi: 10.
1016/j.landusepol.2015.01.030
Saleh, M. A. E. (1998). Place identity: the visual image of Saudi Arabian cities.
Habitat Int. 22, 149–164. doi: 10.1016/S0197-3975(97)00033-7
Scannell, L., and Giﬀord, R. (2010). Deﬁning place attachment: a tripartite
organizing framework. J. Environ. Psychol. 30, 1–10. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2009.
09.006
Semian, M., and Chromy, P. (2014). Regional identity as a driver or a barrier
in the process of regional development: a comparison of selected European
experience. Norsk Geograﬁsk Tidsskrift. 68, 263–270. doi: 10.1080/00291951.
2014.961540
Shamai, S. (1991). Sense of place: an empirical measurement. Geoforum 22, 347–
358. doi: 10.1016/0016-7185(91)90017-K
Shi, Y., and Liu, X. (2019). Research on the literature of green building based
on the Web of Science: a scientometric analysis in CiteSpace (2002–2018).
Sustainability 11:3716. doi: 10.3390/su11133716
Simon, C., Huigen, P., and Groote, P. (2010). Analysing regional identities in the
Netherlands. Tijdschrift Voor Econ. Soc. Geograﬁe 101, 409–421. doi: 10.1111/j.
1467-9663.2009.00564.x
Stedman, R. C. (2002). Toward a social psychology of place: predicting behavior
from place-based cognitions, attitude, and identity. Environ. Behav. 34, 561–
581. doi: 10.1177/0013916502034005001
Stewart, W. P., Liebert, D., and Larkin, K. W. (2004). Community identities as
visions for landscape change. Landsc. Urban Plann. 69, 315–334. doi: 10.1016/j.
landurbplan.2003.07.005
Stobbelaar, D. J., and Pedrol, B. (2011). Perspectives on landscape identity: a
conceptual challenge. Landsc. Res. 36, 321–339. doi: 10.1080/01426397.2011.
564860
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 18 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 294
fpsyg-11-00294 March 7, 2020 Time: 16:26 # 19
Peng et al. Place Identity Meanings
Stokols, D., and Shumaker, S. A. (1981). “People in places, ” in Cognition, Social
Behavior, and the Environment , ed. J. H. Harvey (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates), 441–488.
Stoll-Kleemann, S. (2001). Barriers to nature conservation in Germany: a model
explaining opposition to protected areas. J. Environ. Psychol. 21, 369–385. doi:
10.1006/jevp.2001.0228
Terada, T. (2003). Constructing an ‘East Asian’ concept and growing regional
identity: from EAEC to ASEAN+3. Paciﬁc Rev. 16, 251–277. doi: 10.1080/
0951274032000069615
Terluin, I. J. (2003). Diﬀerences in economic development in rural regions of
advanced countries: an overview and critical analysis of theories. J. Rural Stud.
19, 327–344. doi: 10.1016/S0743-0167(02)00071-2
Tuan, Y. F. (1977). Space and Place: The perspective of experience . Minneapolis,
MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Twigger-Ross, C. L., Bonaiuto, M., and Breakwell, G. (2003). “Identity theories
and environmental psychology, ” in Psychological Theories for Environmental
Issues, eds M. Bonnes, T. Lee, and M. Bonaiuto (Farnham: Ashgate Publishing
Limited), 203–233.
Urquhart, J., and Acott, T. (2013). Constructing ‘The Stade’: ﬁshers’
and non-ﬁshers’ identity and place attachment in Hastings, south-
east England. Mar. Policy 37, 45–54. doi: 10.1016/j.marpol.2012.
04.004
Uzzell, D., Pol, E., and Badenas, D. (2002). Place identiﬁcation, social cohesion,
and enviornmental sustainability. Environ. Behav. 34, 26–53. doi: 10.1177/
0013916502034001003
Vainikka, J. (2012). Narrative claims on regions: prospecting for spatial identities
among social movements in Finland. Soc. Cult. Geogr. 13, 587–605. doi: 10.
1080/14649365.2012.710912
Van den Berg, A. E. (1999). Individual Diﬀerences in the Aesthetic Evaluation
of Natural Landscapes . PhD dissertation of the University of Groningen,
Groningen.
Van Houtum, H., and Lagendijk, A. (2001). Contextualising regional identity and
imagination in the construction of polycentric urban regions: the cases of the
Ruhr area and the Basque country. Urban Stud. 38, 747–767. doi: 10.1080/
00420980120035321
Van Rekom, J., and Go, F. (2006). Being discovered: a blessing to local identities?
Ann. Tourism Res. 33, 767–784. doi: 10.1016/j.annals.2006.03.002
Vidal, T., Berroeta, H., de Masso, A., Valera, S., and Peró, M. (2013). Place
attachment, place identity, sense of community, and local civic participation
in an urban renewal context. Estudios Psicol. 34, 275–286. doi: 10.1174/
021093913808295172
Wheeler, R. (2015). Reconciling windfarms with rural place identity: exploring
residents’ attitudes to existing sites. Sociol. Ruralis 57, 110–132. doi: 10.1111/
soru.12121
White, D. D., Virden, R. J., and Riper, C. J. V. (2008). Eﬀects of place identity, place
dependence, and experience-use history on perceptions of recreation impacts
in a natural setting. Environ. Manage. 42, 647–657. doi: 10.1007/s00267-008-
9143-1
Williams, D. R., and Roggenbuck, J. W. (1989). “Measuring place attachment: some
preliminary results”, in Proceedins of the Abstracts of the 1989 Leisure Research
Symposium, eds L. H. McAvoy and D. Howard (Arlington, V A: National
Recreation and Park Association), 32.
Xu, M., de Bakker, M., Strijker, D., and Wu, H. (2015). Eﬀects of distance from
home to campus on undergraduate place attachment and university experience
in China. J. Environ. Psychol. 43, 95–104. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2015.05.013
Yuen, B. (2005). Searching for place identity in Singapore.Habitat Int.29, 197–214.
doi: 10.1016/j.habitatint.2003.07.002
Zimmerbauer, K. (2011). From image to identity: building regions by place
promotion. Eur. Plann. Stud. 19, 243–260. doi: 10.1080/09654313.2011.532667
Zimmerbauer, K., Suutari, T., and Saartenoja, A. (2012). Resistance to the
deinstitutionalization of a region: borders, identity and activism in a
municipality merger. Geoforum 43, 1065–1075. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2012.
06.009
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2020 Peng, Strijker and Wu. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 19 March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 294