Copyright © 2017 by the author(s). Published here under license by the Resilience Alliance.
Masterson, V . A., R. C. Stedman, J. Enqvist, M. Tengö, M. Giusti, D. Wahl, and U. Svedin. 2017. The contribution of sense of place
to social-ecological systems research: a review and research agenda. Ecology and Society 22(1):49. https://doi.org/10.5751/
ES-08872-220149
Synthesis
The contribution of sense of place to social-ecological systems research: a
review and research agenda
Vanessa A. Masterson 1, Richard C. Stedman 2, Johan Enqvist 1, Maria Tengö 1, Matteo Giusti 1, Darin Wahl 1,3 and Uno Svedin 1
ABSTRACT. To develop and apply goals for future sustainability, we must consider what people care about and what motivates them
to engage in solving sustainability issues. Sense of place theory and methods provide a rich source of insights that, like the social-
ecological systems perspective, assume an interconnected social and biophysical reality. However, these fields of research are only
recently beginning to converge, and we see great potential for further engagement. Here, we present an approach and conceptual tools
for how the sense of place perspective can contribute to social-ecological systems research. A brief review focuses on two areas where
relation to place is particularly relevant: stewardship of ecosystem services, and responses to change in social-ecological systems. Based
on the review, we synthesize specific ways in which sense of place may be applied by social-ecological systems researchers to analyze
individual and social behaviors. We emphasize the importance of descriptive place meanings and evaluative place attachment as tools
to study the patterned variation of sense of place within or among populations or types of places and the implications for resilience
and transformative capacity. We conclude by setting out an agenda for future research that takes into account the concerns of resilience
thinking such as the effects of dynamic ecology, interactions between temporal and spatial scales, and the interplay of rapid and
incremental change on sense of place and place-related behaviors. This future research agenda also includes concerns from the broader
sense of place literature such as the importance of structural power relationships on the creation of place meanings and how scaling
up a sense of place may influence pro-environmental behavior.
Key Words: cognitions; place attachment; place meanings; resilience thinking; responses to change; sense of place; social-ecological
systems; stewardship; transformation
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, there has been increased interest in planetary-level
initiatives such as the newly launched Sustainable Development
Goals (United Nations 2014). The adoption of these
sustainability goals reflects a growing realization that
environmental problems require not only an understanding of
ecological systems, but also of integrated social-ecological
systems (SES). To develop and pursue these ambitious goals, we
must consider what people care about and what motivates them
to engage in solving sustainability issues. It is necessary to
understand the human feedback mechanisms in the dynamics of
SES, and how such responses are underpinned by values,
cognitions, and perceptions of human relationships with nature
(Raymond et al. 2013, von Heland and Folke 2014, Chan et al.
2016).  
The research that informs such sustainability goals includes
broadly the field of sustainability science and lenses such as
resilience thinking and the SES perspective (Berkes and Folke
1998, Folke 2006). The SES perspective builds on interdisciplinary
research linking ecology to economy and political science (Berkes
and Folke 1998, Folke 2006, Liu et al. 2007). Cognitions have been
relatively neglected and undertheorized in SES research (Jones et
al. 2016), but scholars are asking questions about the deeper,
slower variables in social systems such as identity, core values, and
worldviews (Folke et al. 2010, Berkes and Ross 2013) that guide
and constrain human actions (Adger et al. 2009). The need to
understand and assess more systematically these variables
requires closer engagement with social sciences and humanities
(Daniel et al. 2012, Brown et al. 2013, Pröpper and Haupts 2014).
One field of research that directly addresses values and behavior,
and which also shares the ontology of an interconnected social
and natural world, is that of sense of place.  
Invoking notions of sense of place is already helping to improve
analysis in SES research. However, sense of place is often not
operationalized in a way that leverages the richer theoretical and
empirical tradition within sense of place literature, and this
sometimes contributes to conceptual confusion or misuse. More
than just acknowledging sense of place as a relevant concept, we
emphasize the role of sense of place as a field of research with
conceptual and methodological tools that have great potential to
inform emerging SES research. Given that sense of place research,
in some instances, has lacked construct clarity and has used
conflicting definitions (Jorgensen and Stedman 2001), we present
a user-friendly approach for SES scholars. We select and define a
specific set of core sense of place constructs, including place
attachment and place meaning, and briefly lay out the onto-
epistemological assumptions that we think make this approach
compatible with SES analyses.  
We review how sense of place has been employed within two key
areas of enquiry in SES research and resilience thinking:
stewardship of ecosystem services and responses to change. These
are areas where SES scholars have started to implicitly or explicitly
invoke relation to place: sense of place is considered as a
motivation for stewardship and actions to care for the
environment; it is also presented as a cognitive and emotional
variable that mediates how people respond to social-ecological
change. We point out where the engagement has been incomplete
1Stockholm Resilience Centre, Stockholm University, 2Human Dimensions Research Unit, Department of Natural Resources, Cornell University,
3Portland State University, Portland, Oregon (current)
Ecology and Society 22(1): 49
https://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol22/iss1/art49/
or imprecise and highlight how this may have generated some
contradictory and incompatible findings. We then synthesize a set
of specific applications in which a sense of place perspective
would help advance the tools and approaches of SES researchers.
In addition, we highlight future research questions that arise from
considering the broader interests of both research fields.
AN APPROACH TO SENSE OF PLACE RESEARCH
Sense of place has a 40-year trajectory of scholarship, and SES
research should draw on and respond to this trajectory to make
the best use of the theory. We emphasize that there are myriad
different methodological approaches that can and have been used
to study sense of place (for a useful review see Trentleman 2009;
for a spirited debate see Stedman and Beckley 2007, Williams and
Patterson 2007). The sense of place literature includes multiple
constructs and conflicting definitions, leading some to describe
the scholarship as confusing, contradictory, or messy (e.g.,
Hidalgo and Hernández 2001, Jorgensen and Stedman 2001,
Pretty et al. 2003). In response, and at risk of oversimplification,
we sort place scholarship into two main domains. The first, the
phenomenological domain, includes approaches that emphasize
the particular character of lived experience in place. Qualitative
methodologies are emphasized that avoid “a priori theory and
concepts, hypotheses, predetermined methodological procedures
[and] statistical measures of correlation...” (Seamon 2000:163).
Trentleman (2009) notes that foundational place writings are
often in this vein.  
The second domain embraces cause and effect relationships
between concepts, prediction, hypothesis testing, and where
appropriate, generalization (e.g., see Shamai 1991, Lalli 1992,
Jorgensen and Stedman 2001). This approach separates core
constructs into different spheres such as cognition and emotion,
and emphasizes the individual as the unit of analysis. Our paper
employs the latter approach to sense of place as potentially readily
embedded within the systems perspective that characterizes
resilience thinking and studies of SES. We emphasize that these
two domains ought not to be seen as oppositional, but rather,
complementary, each providing its own set of insights that can
be conjoined (see Stedman and Beckley 2007).  
We have presented our approach and its specific relevance for
research that assumes an interconnected social and biophysical
reality. Next, we clarify several key concepts that are well-reflected
within our approach and which are readily linked to the SES
framework (see Fig. 1). We then specify some onto-
epistemological assumptions that underlie our approach and
shape how the concepts are applied.
An introduction to key terms
Sense of place is described by Tuan (1977) as the meanings and
attachment to a setting held by an individual or group. As such,
it is often viewed as the most encompassing core construct within
associated research (e.g., Shamai 1991, Kaltenborn 1998).
Crucially, our approach to sense of place analysis emphasizes
both attachment and meanings, although these concepts are
sometimes conflated and greater analytical emphasis is given to
place attachment than to place meanings (Stedman 2008).  
Place attachment is an emotional bond, usually positive, between
individuals or groups and their environment (Altman and Low
1992). As such, it is fundamentally evaluative (i.e., good vs. bad,
important vs. unimportant). Place attachment is sometimes
conceived as having two subdomains: dependence and identity.
Place dependence (Stokols and Shumaker 1981) conveys an
instrumental connection between people and place, conceived and
measured as the ability of a setting to facilitate goal achievement
and to satisfy important needs (see also Tidball and Stedman 2013
for reflections on the positive nature of dependence). It has been
measured through survey items such as, “This is the best place to
do the things I enjoy” (Jorgensen and Stedman 2001). In
comparison, place identity is defined by Proshansky (1978:155) as
“those dimensions of self that define the individual’s personal
identity in relation to the physical environment.” Place elements
thus become partial answers to the symbolic question of “Who
am I?” and play a part in the formation of the self (Sack 1997).
Place identity is an evaluative concept and should not be confused
with the structures and functions that characterize a particular
setting (what resilience literature refers to as system identity; Folke
et al. 2010) or with what is sometimes called place character (e.g.,
Lyon 2014). A person’s place identity has been measured through
survey items such as, “[This place] really reflects the kind of person
I am” (e.g., Jorgensen and Stedman 2001). Although dependence
and identity can be articulated as distinct conceptual domains,
research results are mixed: some scholars (Moore and Graefe
1994) find these to be distinct components of attachment, whereas
others (e.g., Stedman 2002) find that they conjoin into a common
domain.
Fig. 1. The relationships among key sense of place concepts.
Stedman (2008) argues that the relative neglect of place meaning 
in sense of place research has led to some serious issues in sense
of place research and practice, such as assuming that all people
who have strong attachment will mobilize to protect their place
from a particular threat. Meanings stand in contrast to attachment
in that they are descriptive statements (cognitions, in social
psychology terms) about what a place is, what it is like, and the
kinds of images it conveys (Manzo 2005, Brehm et al. 2013,
Jacquet and Stedman 2013). We can think of them simply as a
series of adjectives, i.e., answers to what kind of a place a setting
is: polluted, lonely, warm. A second type of meaning is a little less
descriptive and a little more symbolic or interpretive, i.e., what,
symbolically, does a place mean: Home? Escape? Third, place
Ecology and Society 22(1): 49
https://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol22/iss1/art49/
meanings can be considered as place character (Lyon 2014): a
given setting can be a farmscape, a tourist place, or a wilderness,
for example.
Key assumptions of our sense of place approach
Here, we explain how our sense of place approach explores a
reality with interconnected social and biophysical components.
We see the assumptions we describe next as compatible with the
SES perspective and therefore important for forging connections
between the two research fields.  
1. Sense of place forms through experience, although this
experience is not solely individualistic, but also social. A
central question in sense of place research involves how sense
of place is formed. Early sense of place thinkers (e.g., Relph
1976, Tuan 1977) posit that sense of place is formed through
freely chosen direct encounter with landscape; these
encounters help to form highly personalized place meanings.
Much subsequent scholarship has taken this approach.
Although useful, this emphasis has probably impeded the
integration of sense of place and SES analyses. Our
approach recognizes that sense of place may also be formed
through social experiences. This social nature of experience
is expressed in several ways. First, experiences differ in
systematic, predictable ways based on roles that are socially
produced and have socially derived expectations associated
with them: one encounters a landscape through his or her
role as (for example) a hunter, a real estate developer, or a
botanist. The meanings are based, at least in part, on the
social expectations associated with each of these roles. A
second way in which meanings are fundamentally social
rather than just individually formed is based on power
relations that affect interpretation and meaning making.
Social actors are taught, e.g., through education programs
(Kudryavtsev et al. 2012) and interpretation (Rickard and
Stedman 2015), about what is important or normative about
a place, rather than creating these meanings on their own.
Power exerts itself in a subtler way as well: even our
experiences are not freely chosen, but are influenced by the
current configuration of the landscape (Pred 1984, Zukin
1991, Stokowski 2002). Power establishes rules that manage
the landscape and guide meanings. Institutions “create” the
environment (Freudenburg et al. 1995) by setting regulations
and upholding cultural norms that promote some activities
and meanings over others. 
2. Sense of place emerges from human interactions with the
biophysical environment. Lewicka (2011:213) notes, “For
many years, interest in social dimensions of place
attachment has been stronger than interest in its physical
dimensions.” Sense of place has been viewed mostly as a
social construction, a product of shared behavioral and
cultural processes, rather than the result of perceptual and
cognitive processes rooted in physical characteristics of
settings (e.g., Greider and Garkovich 1994). However, some
authors suggest that we can think of the material
environment as contributing to sense of place through direct
and indirect causal mechanisms: (1) directly, as the raw
material for meanings inferred directly from the landscape:
it is easier, for example, to distill wilderness meanings from
a landscape with old-growth trees and clean water than from
a landscape polluted by human use; (2) indirectly, by
enabling or constraining experiences that contribute to
meanings. One cannot catch fish (and create meanings such
as good fishing places) where no fish exist, e.g., if the water
has become polluted or too warm. For an example, see
Stedman (2003 a) and Stedman and Hammer (2006), who
quantitatively assessed the relationship between the number
of houses on the shoreline of lakes and meanings,
attachment, and concern about water quality. Therefore, we
view sense of place as an emergent property of a social-
biophysical interaction, although so far, sense of place
research has had a limited appreciation of the role of nature
and ecology in forming place (but see, e.g., Stedman and
Ingalls (2014), who engage the intersection of topophilia
and biophilia as mutually constitutive). 
3. Place meanings and attachment are subjective, but they vary
systematically. Although each person’s sense of place is
fundamentally unique, this variation is patterned, rather
than random, where different types of people, experiences,
and environments will lead to systematic differences in
meanings, attachment, and behavior. The subjectivity of
meanings is crucial for engaging transformation and
stewardship, and sense of place tools enable researchers to
ask comparative questions that examine variation. Sources
of variation (i.e., based on characteristics of people or place)
are important to understand to connect sense of place to
systems perspectives (Stedman 2016). This is also useful for
relating subjective meanings and their variation to system-
level effects. 
4. Patterned relationships with place help to predict specific types
of behavior. Sense of place has been shown to be a powerful
predictor of attitudes toward potential changes and
behavioral intentions, both reactive and proactive (Bonaiuto
et al. 2002, Devine-Wright 2009). A great deal of the sense
of place literature implicitly assumes (or explicitly asserts)
that greater place attachment leads to pro-environmental
behavior. While the truism that “we fight for the places we
are attached to” is generically plausible, the relationship is
not so simple. People do not simply engage in places they
are attached to; their particular forms of engagement rest
on place meanings they hold dear and perceive as threatened
(Vorkinn and Riese 2001, Kyle et al. 2004). Because there
can be a range of meanings associated with the same place,
people respond to change differently depending on how their
respective meanings are affected by this change (Stedman
2003 a, 2008). Our approach to sense of place provides the
tools to assess and characterize the relationship between
attachment and behavioral intentions and actions. In
particular, because place is not the same as environment, not
all threats to place meanings are environmental; for instance,
attachment to place that symbolizes one’s social connections
(civic place attachment) has been found not to be correlated
with pro-environmental behavior (Scannell and Gifford
2010).
A BRIEF REVIEW OF THE USE OF SENSE OF PLACE IN
SOCIAL-ECOLOGICAL SYSTEMS RESEARCH
Place is increasingly important as an organizational concept in
SES studies, building on the experiences of the Millennium
Ecology and Society 22(1): 49
https://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol22/iss1/art49/
Ecosystem Assessment and the move toward long-term
comparative place-based studies (Carpenter et al. 2009, Wilbanks
2015). Previous engagements with sense of place by SES scholars
treat it as a phenomenon relevant to understanding certain social-
ecological processes. Although this engagement often operates in
similar intellectual terrain as sense of place research without
necessarily using the same language (i.e., indirect engagement), it
has also more directly invoked constructs from sense of place
literature such as place attachment or identity.  
We next review SES research that engages sense of place both
directly and indirectly to demonstrate the relevance of further
engagement with sense of place and to identify weaknesses and
gaps that can be strengthened by a more rigorous approach to
sense of place. The review is organized into two themes in which
engagement with sense of place is already taking place and in
which we see considerable potential for theory and methods from
the field of sense of place research to inform thinking.
Sense of place and stewardship of ecosystem services
Stewardship generally refers to a responsible management or
caretaking, often of natural resources or the environment. The
term has been adopted by SES scholars to describe more
specifically an active shaping of development trajectories at
multiple scales, in a way that manages for uncertainty and
threshold effects, and the normative goals of building ecological
resilience and improving human well-being (Chapin et al. 2011,
Folke et al. 2011). We review three ways in which sense of place
is drawn on to understand stewardship.
People-place relations can strengthen protective norms
Among the most straightforward arguments linking stewardship
to sense of place is as a “motivation for long-term stewardship”
(Chapin and Knapp 2015:38) or in other ways supporting pro-
environmental or pro-conservation behavior (for reviews, see
Meyfroidt 2013, Gifford 2014, and Zylstra et al. 2014). This
argument draws on early explorations of how to manage SES that
invoke sense of place as a complex concept that influences
peoples’ perceptions and actions (Davidson-Hunt and Berkes
2003, Andersson et al. 2007), and the role of relationships to place
and nature for stewardship actions, including local and traditional
ecological knowledge, as embedded in institutions for stewardship
(Folke et al. 2003, 2005). This is expressed explicitly by Chapin
and Knapp (2015:39), who argue that, “capitaliz[ing] on the
attachment that people feel to particular places [can] provide a
foundation for stewardship strategies.” Sense of place is seen as
a prerequisite condition for residents to notice degradation and
trigger action through public concern (Chapin et al. 2012). There
is also growing interest in sense of place from related fields such
as conservation ecology, which has begun to explore place
attachment as motivating conservation behavior (e.g., Farmer et
al. 2011, Raymond et al. 2011, Larson et al. 2013).  
Further, it has been argued that contested senses of place can be
an obstacle for stewardship (Chapin and Knapp 2015) and,
alternatively, that consensus regarding place meanings can
contribute to community cohesion and sustainability (Chapin et
al. 2012). Scholars studying civic engagement in stewardship
groups have identified tensions between how different members’
relations to a place are articulated (Ernstson and Sörlin 2009) and
have started to explore the consequences of such heterogeneity
within groups (Enqvist et al. 2014). While this is a good starting
point, these attempts have yet to engage fully and rigorously with
concepts of sense of place such as place meaning and how it
influences people’s behavioral intentions.
Sense of place in assessment of ecosystem management
Sense of place has been employed in a range of ways in relation
to assessments of ecosystem services and their management: for
assessment of preferences in planning, as an indicator of cultural
ecosystem services, and as a constituent of well-being as derived
from ecosystems. First, sense of place has been applied as a tool
for assessing values and preferences in ecosystem assessments
(Martín-López et al. 2012, Plieninger et al. 2013), for example, to
identify human-valued priority areas for environmental
conservation and management (Raymond et al. 2009) and to
inform land-use planning (Brown and Raymond 2007).  
Second, ecosystem assessments have explicitly incorporated sense
of place as an ecosystem service in its own right (Millennium
Ecosystem Assessment 2005, Hausman et al. 2016) and as a
quantitative indicator (see Hernández-Morcillo et al. 2013). In
particular, it has been used in the realm of cultural ecosystem
services, which include intangible values that are difficult to
measure (Butler and Oluoch-Kosura 2006, Chan et al. 2012),
partly because of the subjective and place-based variation of
cultural ecosystem services (e.g., Daniel et al. 2012, Milcu et al.
2013). Some of these challenges may be resolved through more
systematic engagement with sense of place as an indicator of
cultural ecosystem services.  
Third, sense of place has been theorized as a constituent of well-
being, including well-being contingent upon ecosystem services
(Summers et al. 2012, Russell et al. 2013). However, there has been
insufficient attention to understanding well-being as co-created
by people and ecosystems (Smith et al. 2013), as well as
incorporating the subjectivity of well-being in this context
(Breslow et al. 2016). It is notoriously difficult to assess human
well-being in a way that captures fine-grained variations within
or among groups of people in the same place (Raudsepp-Hearne
et al. 2010, Daw et al. 2011, Russell et al. 2012). Applying sense
of place tools as an indicator of subjective well-being could
contribute to meeting these challenges.
Stewardship practices and knowledge are embedded in place
Place-based approaches to ecosystem assessments are beneficial
for clarifying local contexts, values, and priorities (Potschin and
Haines-Y oung 2013). Place has been implicitly invoked in studies
linking ecosystem resilience to community well-being (Berkes and
Folke 1998), especially in the coevolution of local and traditional
ecological knowledge, adaptive institutions, and responding to
changes in nature and landscape dynamics (Berkes et al. 2000,
Olsson and Folke 2001, Tengö and von Heland 2011).  
Chapin and Knapp (2015) argue that stewardship can be fostered
by the place attachments produced through repeated personal
experiences filtered through identity and social context. Research
focusing on stewardship in urban SES has argued that a stronger
sense of place is associated not only with stronger protective
norms but also more local ecological knowledge (Andersson et
al. 2007). Barthel et al. (2013:1149) argue that relation to place
matters for “stewardship memory” because “biophysical
elements, including species, landscape features, written accounts
and artifacts [...] structure management practices” and thereby
Ecology and Society 22(1): 49
https://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol22/iss1/art49/
provide a guide for stewardship that is better adapted to local
conditions. Learning through experience that is embedded in local,
place-based institutions is emphasized in this context, as well as
the role of emotional and cultural connections to place (e.g., Berkes
et al. 2003, von Heland and Folke 2014). Recent work also
emphasizes that the emotional attachment to place can serve as a
bridge between ecosystem functioning and stakeholders’
engagement in environmental stewardship (Andersson et al. 2015).
So far, the use of sense of place as a concept in this literature has
been vague and ad hoc and stands to gain considerably from a
more systematic empirical engagement with sense of place
literature.
Sense of place and responding to change in social-ecological
systems
Another important area within SES research concerns the capacity
of individuals, communities, and institutions to respond and adapt
to social and ecological change (Berkes et al. 2003, Walker et al.
2004, Westley et al. 2011) or to transform fundamentally the nature
of SES toward more sustainable trajectories (Walker et al. 2004,
Chapin et al 2010). Transformative change often involves shifts in
perception and meaning (Folke et al. 2010). Disturbances to SES
such as flooding, industry closure, or climate change can affect the
character of a place through a change to the material and social
aspects of place, and consequently, can affect the symbolic
meanings that residents hold dear, causing psychological and
emotional distress (Albrecht et al. 2007, Jacquet and Stedman
2014). Therefore, sense of place has been studied as a cognitive-
emotional factor that may affect how individuals and communities
engage in change processes (Adger et al. 2009, 2013, Clayton et al.
2015) by adapting practices to new conditions, relocating to
another place, or shifting economic strategies. We review two main
areas of engagement with sense of place and its influence on
responses to change.
Strong place attachment may support adaptation to change
SES research has begun to point to sense of place as an important
foundation of community resilience (e.g., Berkes and Ross 2013).
Studies show that place attachment may support adaptation when
livelihoods are threatened by changes such as declining agricultural
viability in the face of climate change (Marshall et al. 2012, Eakin
et al. 2016), declining populations and services (Amundsen 2013),
increased risk of flooding (Quinn 2014), or gradual industry
closure (Sampson and Goodrich 2005, Lyon 2014). By adapting
to these changes, community structure and character of place can
be retained, which may foster social resilience (Sampson and
Goodrich 2005, Lyon 2014). Specifically, Marshall et al. (2012)
suggest that place attachment enhances adaptive capacity,
proposing that social capital, local knowledge, and reciprocal
networks facilitate adaptation to incremental social-ecological
change. Eakin et al. (2016) show that for farmers in Arizona, USA,
it is the commitment to community associated with place
attachment that contributes to adaptive learning to maintain
viability as farmers.  
Resilience thinking has improved the understanding of adaptation
as the ability to change in order to remain in a current state.
However, to understand better how emotion and perception affect
adaptation requires better attention to what people are attached
to, as well as how the specific changes may influence individual
and group identity. For example, adaptations to climate change
may be supported by an understanding of the threat that climate
change poses to place identity (Adger et al. 2011, Fresque-Baxter
and Armitage 2012), e.g., farming that has remained in a place
for several generations. Similarly, adaptation strategies can also
be resisted by certain groups if the required adaptations threaten
such identities. Without a thorough understanding of these
dimensions of sense of place, studies may not be able to assess
accurately adaptive capacity in communities facing novel
circumstances.
Place attachment as a barrier for transformative change
Place attachment may also be a barrier to navigating change when
incremental responses are insufficient and more fundamental
change is required to break feedbacks that lead to degradation of
ecosystems and well-being. For example, strong place attachment
is negatively related to peanut farmers’ and cattle grazers’
willingness to incorporate transformative change into their work
lives by relocating along with the industry when conditions are
no longer tenable (Marshall et al. 2012, Marshall and Stokes
2014). The nature of change is important: if a shift of occupation
or location is required, strong place attachment can be a barrier
to change. In this way, strong attachment constrains migration
away from areas of high exposure to, for example, climate change
effects (Adger et al. 2013).  
Other studies have begun to assess the role of sense of place on
transformative change within a place. Marshall et al. (2016)
engaged agricultural producers who may be subject to untenable
agricultural conditions because of predicted climate change
effects. They assessed transformative capacity in terms of the
willingness to change land-use production and diversify
livelihoods and found that strong place attachment was correlated
with low transformative capacity. In contrast, preliminary work
points to the importance of place meanings for successful
transformation: Lyon (2014) argues that the culturally inherited
character of a place can function as an asset for the community
during a successful transformation process, and Chapin et al.
(2012) point to the importance of shared place meanings in
building consensus and collective action for transformation.  
The preceding paragraphs show that different operationalizations
of the concept of transformation can produce discrepancy in
findings. Some of these discrepancies can be explained by
inconsistent uses of sense of place measures. There is also a need
to clarify the scale at which attachment to place is studied (e.g.,
local, regional) and to relate this to the scale at which
transformation is occurring.
APPLICATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH
Sense of place research can contribute to SES research in
fundamental ways: broadly speaking, sense of place can be both
a driver and an outcome of social-ecological processes. It is a
social-ecological linkage that can constrain and enable change.
Sense of place is an emergent property of individuals and places
that matters for better stewardship and is an indicator of human
well-being. Our targeted review of sense of place literature, as
well as how SES scholars have begun to engage with the concept,
demonstrates that there is considerable potential for bringing
more rigor to research questions already being asked within SES
studies and for developing new research questions in this realm.  
Ecology and Society 22(1): 49
https://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol22/iss1/art49/
Based on the gaps identified here, we discuss four ways in which
our approach to sense of place can be applied by scholars studying
SES. We then identify future research areas where further
engagement across sense of place scholarship and SES research
holds potential. We note that scholars have tended to study sense
of place as motivating stewardship practices or as a cognitive
influence underpinning human responses to change, i.e., in
separate themes. However, stewardship of ecosystems requires a
capacity to deal with uncertainty and complexity and to navigate
fundamental shifts or transformations (Chapin et al. 2011), so
there is great potential for combination of the two themes, and
hence, we discuss these together here.
Applications of sense of place in social-ecological systems studies
In the following, we synthesize and discuss areas that could be
informed by existing sense of place research. In other words, what
can sense of place do for SES scholarship?
Identify what underpins protective and restorative actions
Sense of place literature provides theory and tools for a more
nuanced understanding of the root of pro-environmental actions.
First, research on place attachment has shown that place
attachment can indeed contribute to protective and restorative
stewardship actions in dynamic SES. For example, disasters that
trigger human affinity for nature and meaningful places can also
give rise to actions to rebuild environments and restore ecological
function (Tidball 2012). Place attachment provides an evaluative
measure (e.g., Williams and Roggenbuck 1989, Stedman 2002)
for empirical studies of the role of sense of place in motivating
or discouraging stewardship actions, which could expand the
work of, for example, Andersson et al. (2007) and Barthel et al.
(2010).  
Second, strong attachment is associated with care and action
(Vorkinn and Riese 2001), but this does not necessarily predict
what type of action is supported (Huber and Arnberge 2016).
Attachment is based on meanings: We become attached to a
landscape as embodying a certain set of meanings, and it is those
meanings we seek to preserve (Stedman 2003a, Devine-Wright
2009). Place meanings and attachment are thus analytically
distinct: people who are all strongly attached to a place are not
necessarily attached to the same thing because one setting can
embody many different sets of meanings, each emphasized by
different actors. For example, a small rural town may represent a
place of strong community and familiarity, a place of natural
beauty with good recreational opportunities, or a “backwards”
and stifling place with no economic opportunities. As shown in
studies of hypothetical changes in recreational lakes (Stedman
2003 a) as well as industrial wind farm development (Jacquet and
Stedman 2013), opposition or support to change is influenced by
which meanings are threatened and which are not (Stedman 2008).
Debates about the future of a place are thus rarely between people
who are attached vs. people who are not, but are rather between
holders of different or even oppositional meanings.  
Third, because meanings frame what it is that people see as worthy
of protection or enhancement, it follows that place meanings
underpin individual and collective behavior in stewardship and
in responding to change. For example, recruiting volunteers for a
wetland nature reserve may be more or less successful depending
on whether nearby residents see the area as a birdwatching site or
as a place to do water sports.
Map and assess patterns of variation
Another application for SES research comes from the realization
that place-related actions and responses are not random (refer to
the assumptions set out earlier in this paper). Place attachment
and place meanings vary systematically across a population, and
this variability can be measured through a range of standardized
quantitative tools (e.g., Stedman 2003b) as well as innovative
qualitative and mixed methods such as visual methods (e.g.,
Beckley et al. 2007), mapping (Brown and Raymond 2007), or
narrative interviews (Russ et al. 2015). As we noted previously,
synthetic understandings of place emerge through conjoining
multiple methods, both quantitative and qualitative. For example,
community change could be analyzed by exploring how meanings
and attachment differ between long-term residents and
newcomers and how their responses to social-ecological change
may vary (i.e., How do different kinds of people interpret and
respond to different kinds of changes such as increased
population or pollution?). Analysis can also compare across
different types of environments or different political regimes.
Researchers can also conduct longitudinal analysis (e.g., Have
dominant meanings changed over time?) and analyze the
relationships between changes in attachment and meanings to
patterns of environmental change (e.g., What sorts of
environmental phenomena are perceived and acted toward in
what kinds of ways by what kinds of people?). For example, there
are indications that local ecological knowledge may be linked to
higher place attachment (Andersson et al. 2007, Eakin et al. 2016).
Conceptual tools such as place meanings and measures of
attachment can be engaged to understand in more detail how
senses of place covary with various types of knowledge and
practice, for example.
Evaluate how sense of place patterns influence the resilience of a
system
Knowledge about the patterns of how people relate to place can
be applied to understand opportunities for collaboration as well
as adaptive and transformative capacity as different aspects of
social-ecological resilience. For example, place attachment can
work as a motivation for farmers to adapt when conditions make
earlier activities untenable. However, it can also impede action
when more fundamental transformation is required (Marshall et
al. 2012) that threatens place identities (Fresque-Baxter and
Armitage 2012). Thus, there is great potential for more research
to tease out how different types of attachment, including place
identity and dependence, matter for capacity to deal with change,
further expanding the work of, for example, Marshall et al. (2012,
2014) and Eakin et al. (2016). Additionally, this research will
benefit from engaging place meanings. Assessing how external
changes (or lack thereof) threaten specific place meanings may
generate a deeper understanding of people’s attitudes toward a
change and their willingness to act (Stedman 2002, Devine-Wright
and Howes 2010).  
Another application relates to successful collaboration:
coexistence of multiple different place meanings may create
conflict and disrupt community cohesion and stewardship (Yung
et al. 2003, Chapin et al. 2012, Chapin and Knapp 2015). For
example, in rural development interventions, rural communities
and state actors or nongovernmental organizations may hold
different meanings for a particular landscape (e.g., a forest as a
threatened and biodiverse wilderness to be protected from human
Ecology and Society 22(1): 49
https://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol22/iss1/art49/
use vs. a sacred site for traditional rituals), as shown in a case
study in the Eastern Cape, South Africa (Masterson 2016). Failure
to understand these differences might disrupt communication
between actors or even cause conflict if the meanings are made
explicit but not accepted by the other party. Sense of place
research offers methods to evaluate the diversity of place
meanings that can be associated with the same place by a group
of individuals (Stedman 2006, Jacquet and Stedman 2013, Milcu
et al. 2014). In contrast, societies that are able to allow and engage
multiple place meanings or make use of shared place meanings
may be more resilient (Stedman 1999). The meanings can provide
different understandings of emerging problems and thereby
diversify the knowledge and range of options available for dealing
with change; similarly, this diversity can be a source of innovation
for transformation toward more desirable pathways of
development in SES.
Assess stewardship outcomes and priorities
Lastly, the tools afforded by this approach to sense of place offer
a way to study subjective, cultural, and relational dimensions of
ecosystem services and the benefits they create, and to capture the
fine-grained variations of ecosystem service delivery and access.
These measures of sense of place can serve as indicators of
changes in ecosystem service production as a result of stewardship
interventions as well as social-ecological change.  
Assessing outcomes also requires measures of how ecosystems
affect human well-being (Smith et al. 2013), which should include
both objective and subjective measures (Breslow et al. 2016).
Sense of place offers measures that may be used as indicators of
well-being at an individual and community level (Theodori 2001,
Beckley et al. 2002, Lewicka 2011) or to quantify subjective well-
being. For example, sense of place may be used to assess how
ecosystem services contribute to well-being of different groups or
to assess outcomes of a flood, market collapse, or rapid energy
development (e.g., Jacquet and Stedman 2013, 2014). Our
approach is grounded in an understanding of this well-being as
both produced in a social context as well as rooted in a biophysical
environment. Sense of place is thereby compatible with the SES
understanding of ecosystems services as coproduced, i.e., that
they emerge out of social-ecological interactions (Reyers et al.
2013, Anderson et al. 2015).  
In addition to assessing change, sense of place is also useful for
identifying priorities and cues for stewardship engagement in SES,
for example, using tools such as described by Raymond et al.
(2009). When combined with qualitative enquiries into place
meanings, measures of place attachment can be particularly
useful for assessing competing values and preferences and how
they inform ecosystem management (Davenport and Anderson
2005) to guide how to move toward stewardship-based
management.
Stewardship and transformation in a changing world: future
research questions
Future integration of sense of place and SES will benefit from
consideration of the broader interests of both fields. This includes
strengths of sense of place such as the consideration of political
influence as well as SES interests such as dynamic ecology, the
interactions between temporal and spatial scales, and the
interplay of rapid and incremental change. Engagement between
these two research fields can open up or invigorate areas of inquiry
in which the interests of both fields may be served.  
The influence of chronic versus acute changes on sense of place: 
Social-ecological changes can vary in intensity and speed, which
matters for how they are experienced and how people respond
(Gunderson 2003). Research on transformation emphasizes rapid
change and crisis as a window of opportunity and potential
trigger for collective action (Folke et al. 2005). Gradual threats
may allow for meanings and identities to be maintained through
mitigative, incremental actions, which can impede the recognition
of the need for radical change, or they can also result in slowly
emerging conflicts over meanings and associated actions. In
contrast, sudden threats may immediately challenge the viability
of meanings and identity and may potentially trigger a reaction.
Following disasters, the personal need to engage with the natural
environment and to act to restore important place meanings may
both create engagements with biophysical places (Tidball 2012,
Stedman and Ingalls 2014) and rally a community to
transformative action (Folke et al. 2005, Tidball and Krasny
2014). This can contribute to the understanding of what catalyzes
and frames constructive collective action for transformation.  
The contribution of place meanings to systems inertia or
transformative change: Sense of place research emphasizes that
meaning and attachment are dynamic and are in a constant state
of creation and recreation (Stokowski 2002, Heise 2008). Moving
beyond the effect of a static sense of place on individual behavior,
future research should focus on mechanisms that link dynamic
sense of place to the state or condition of an SES (and by
implication, the resilience of the SES). In times of environmental
or social change, place meanings often change slower than
economic or environmental realities and can remain vital to local
identity (Stedman 2002, Kyle et al. 2004, Lyon 2014). Meanings
thereby may act as “slow” variables in the system, which can create
a time lag that prevents timely action to respond to or prepare for
changes. Simultaneously, relatively rapid biophysical change can
make place meanings seem constant even when they are slowly
changing (Keilty et al. 2016), extending the “shifting baseline”
argument of Pauly (1995). This may lead to a social-ecological
trap if meanings and attachments obfuscate ecological cues and
people are not able to respond and adapt adequately or fast
enough (Stedman 2016). In other situations, particularly in times
of high social mobility and change, place meanings may act as a
fast variable in a system as new actors precipitate a shift in
meanings that has implications for ecosystem management.  
Whose meanings are included and favored and why, and implications
for SES: The academic traditions from which sense of place arose
are concerned with understanding the power landscapes through
which sense of place emerges. As places are partially socially
constructed, their meanings can be socially contested and
renegotiated (Pred 1984, Zukin 1991, Lyon 2014, Ingalls and
Stedman 2016). Therefore, sense of place brings potential new
tools and language for SES and resilience research to engage
further with issues of “power to and power over” (Boonstra 2016)
in collective action and negotiations of stewardship in SES. It is
important that future research considers how and why certain
place meanings and interests are promoted and reproduced
through guided transformations toward sustainability (Leach et
al. 2012) as well as in international decision making on
sustainability issues such as climate change (Adger et al. 2011).
Examining different place meanings provides one way to
acknowledge and analyze the values and attitudes of multiple
stakeholders and how their relative positions may influence the
Ecology and Society 22(1): 49
https://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol22/iss1/art49/
outcome of interventions in SES (Masterson 2016). Sense of place
offers an approach to exploring power relationships for stewardship
by analyzing top-down influences on people’s place-based attitudes
(e.g., Stokowski 2002, Bell and Y ork 2010).  
Ecologically informed meanings or “the ecology of sense of place”: 
There is a need to go beyond a simplified and static view of nature
or environmental problems that is displayed in much of the sense
of place literature. A more coherent engagement with insights from
resilience thinking, regarding, for example, cross-scale dynamics,
functional diversity, and threshold effects (Folke 2006), would
contribute to a fuller understanding of the biophysical elements of
place. What are the roles of ecosystem qualities such as biodiversity
and ecological integrity in forming and nurturing “sense of nature-
in-place” (Stedman and Ingalls 2014)? How does ecosystem change,
incremental and rapid, affect sense of place (e.g., Tidball and
Stedman 2013)? How do changing patterns of interactions with
nature in places (e.g., through urbanization) alter meanings and
attachment that may underpin stewardship? SES research also
emphasizes the importance of learning in building resilience of
SES. Can particular place meanings be associated with a deeper
understanding of ecological dynamics and thereby provide a source
of learning about how to manage that particular ecosystem or
restore it from a degraded state (e.g., Enqvist et al. 2016)?  
Scaling up stewardship behavior from individual to global: Sense of
place literature is dominated by research occurring at relatively
small scales (Lewicka 2011) and, as a consequence, proximity, direct
experiences, and the length of exposure to the same physical space
are factors that are often correlated with a strong sense of place.
However, how do sense of place and sustainable behavior scale up?
Can attachment to a local place promote stewardship at a more
general level, in a kind of “rooted cosmopolitanism” (Chapin and
Knapp 2015)? It has been suggested that “care may be a way to
engage people in planetary stewardship by connecting their
responses to what they notice in everyday life with their effect on
larger environmental systems” (Nassauer 2011:321). When a
personal experience of the whole biosphere is inaccessible,
mediated experiences of the global ecological system may have a
crucial role in defining a sense of the biosphere. The panarchy model
in resilience thinking (Gunderson and Holling 2002) could provide
a source of hypotheses about cross-scale dynamics of sense of place,
which could be integrated with, e.g., studies of how attachment to
neighborhood, state, country, and the globe are correlated with
environmental attitudes (Devine-Wright et al. 2015).
CONCLUSION
Setting normative goals for the future and assessing their
sustainability and the pathways that may lead toward them requires
serious engagement with how values, behaviors, and emotions
emerge from relationships with nature and ecosystem dynamics. To
contribute to this work, we have investigated the connections
between two complementary intellectual territories. It is a meeting
of two pluralistic research domains. We do not present a
symmetrical connection; rather, our effort has been to examine the
extent to which sense of place insights from several decades of
research can contribute to SES research and resilience thinking. In
particular, we focus on an approach that views sense of place as
created through social and ecological interactions.  
Our approach clarifies sense of place constructs to deepen the
understanding of the human variables that constrain or enable
stewardship and transformative capacity. Specifically, these
human value domains include the effect of cognition, emotion,
and attitude on behavior. We show that for research on
stewardship, sense of place literature can offer a language and
robust conceptual building blocks that help unpack a person’s
relation to their physical and natural environment, explain the
emergence of stewardship, and build a theoretical and
methodological framework that better incorporates competing
values and preferences in ecosystem governance and assessments.
We also see promising engagement with sense of place concepts
in studies of how people respond to change. A more systematic
engagement with the subdimensions of attachment (identity and
dependence) and meaning, as well as the use of instruments to
assess these, will continue to improve the clarity, increase
comparability, and further resolve discrepancies in findings.
Crucially, we also propose that these tools may be usefully engaged
in other research topics within SES: We offer these topics as a
starting point where initial thinking has already occurred.  
Our approach emphasizes place meanings as a key element of
sense of place, complementing place attachment in predicting
behavioral intent. By focusing on the meanings to which people
are attached, we move beyond a normative view of sense of place
as always positive for sustainability outcomes. We show that
although values and cognitions are subjectively held and vary
within a population and among characteristics of a place, this
variation is systematic and can therefore be measured. With tools
to identify how sense of place covaries with other system variables,
our approach provides a way to assess how relation to place
influences adaptive capacity, collaboration, and priorities for
stewardship of SES.  
Sustainability is about defining and working toward creating a
tenable place for humanity to live. Whether place refers to one’s
backyard or the planet as a whole, understanding how people
relate to places is key for sustainable development. One of the
major challenges and opportunities is to develop integrated
methods and indicators that could make these phenomena more
tangible and measurable without neglecting the subjective,
qualitative nature of sense of place. This, in turn, has direct
implications for management of both small and vast SES that
provide our home as humankind.
Responses to this article can be read online at: 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/issues/responses.
php/8872
Acknowledgments:
We thank additional participants in the PhD course in Sense of
place and resilience in social-ecological systems led by Richard
Stedman at the Stockholm Resilience Centre during autumn 2013
(Emma Björkvik, Julie Goodness, Jamila Haider, Britt Stikvoort,
and Viveca Mellegård) for assisting in the development of these
ideas. We acknowledge a research grant from the Swedish Research
Council (VR 2014-3394) and a core grant from MISTRA to the
Stockholm Resilience Centre. Additionally, we acknowledge the
following for supporting the collaboration: Cornell University
College of Agriculture and Life Sciences supporting sabbatical
Ecology and Society 22(1): 49
https://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol22/iss1/art49/
leave, and Stockholm University, the Sweden-America Foundation,
and a C.F. Liljevachl J:or travel grant for supporting research visits
to Cornell University. We also express our gratitude to Thomas
Elmqvist for facilitating the collaboration and to Keith Tidball,
Simon West, Erik Andersson, and three anonymous reviewers for
helpful comments.
LITERATURE CITED
Adger, W . N., J. Barnett, K. Brown, N. Marshall, and K. O’Brien.
2013. Cultural dimensions of climate change impacts and
adaptation. Nature Climate Change 3:112-117. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1038/nclimate1666  
Adger, W . N., J. Barnett, F . S. Chapin III, and H. Ellemor. 2011.
This must be the place: underrepresentation of identity and
meaning in climate change decision-making. Global Environmental
Politics 11(2):1-25. http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/GLEP_a_00051  
Adger, W . N., S. Dessai, M. Goulden, M. Hulme, I. Lorenzoni,
D. R. Nelson, L. O. Naess, J. Wolf, and A. Wreford. 2009. Are
there social limits to adaptation to climate change? Climatic
Change 93(3):335-354. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10584-008-9520-
z  
Albrecht, G., G.-M. Sartore, L. Connor, N. Higginbotham, S.
Freeman, B. Kelly, H. Stain, A. Tonna, and G. Pollard. 2007.
Solastalgia: the distress caused by environmental change.
Australasian Psychiatry 15(S1):S95-S98. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1080/10398560701701288  
Altman, I., and S. M. Low, editors. 1992. Place attachment. 
Springer, New Y ork, New Y ork, USA. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/978-1-4684-8753-4  
Amundsen, H. 2013. Place attachment as a driver of adaptation
in coastal communities in northern Norway. Local Environment 
20(3):257-276. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13549839.2013.838751  
Andersson, E., S. Barthel, and K. Ahrné. 2007. Measuring social-
ecological dynamics behind the generation of ecosystem services.
Ecological Applications 17(5):1267-1278. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1890/06-1116.1  
Andersson, E., M. Tengö, T. McPhearson, and P . Kremer. 2015.
Cultural ecosystem services as a gateway for improving urban
sustainability. Ecosystem Services 12:165-168. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.ecoser.2014.08.002  
Barthel, S., C. Crumley, and U. Svedin. 2013. Bio-cultural refugia
—safeguarding diversity of practices for food security and
biodiversity. Global Environmental Change 23(5):1142-1152.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.05.001  
Barthel, S., C. Folke, and J. Colding. 2010. Social-ecological
memory in urban gardens—retaining the capacity for
management of ecosystem services. Global Environmental Change 
20(2):255-265. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2010.01.001  
Beckley, T., J. Parkins, and R. Stedman. 2002. Indicators of forest-
dependent community sustainability: the evolution of research.
Forestry Chronicle 78(5):626-636. http://dx.doi.org/10.5558/
tfc78626-5  
Beckley, T. M., R. C. Stedman, S. M. Wallace, and M. Ambard.
2007. Snapshots of what matters most: using resident-employed
photography to articulate attachment to place. Society and
Natural Resources 20(10):913-929. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08­
941920701537007  
Bell, S. E., and R. Y ork. 2010. Community economic identity: the
coal industry and ideology construction in West Virginia. Rural
Sociology 75(1):111-143. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1549-0831.2009.00004.
x  
Berkes, F ., J. Colding, and C. Folke. 2000. Rediscovery of
traditional ecological knowledge as adaptive management.
Ecological Applications 10(5):1251-1262. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1890/1051-0761(2000)010[1251:ROTEKA]2.0.CO;2  
Berkes, F ., J. Colding, and C. Folke, editors. 2003. Navigating
social-ecological systems: building resilience for complexity and
change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511541957  
Berkes, F ., and C. Folke, editors. 1998. Linking social and
ecological systems: management practices and social mechanisms
for building resilience. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK.  
Berkes, F ., and H. Ross. 2013. Community resilience: toward an
integrated approach. Society and Natural Resources 26(1):5-20.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08941920.2012.736605  
Bonaiuto, M., G. Carrus, H. Martorella, and M. Bonnes. 2002.
Local identity processes and environmental attitudes in land use
changes: the case of natural protected areas. Journal of Economic
Psychology 23(5):631-653. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0167-4870
(02)00121-6  
Boonstra, W . J. 2016. Conceptualizing power to study social-
ecological interactions. Ecology and Society 21(1):21. http://dx.
doi.org/10.5751/es-07966-210121  
Brehm, J. M., B. W . Eisenhauer, and R. C. Stedman. 2013.
Environmental concern: examining the role of place meaning and
place attachment. Society and Natural Resources 26(5):522-538.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08941920.2012.715726  
Breslow, S. J., B. Sojka, R. Barnea, X. Basurto, C. Carothers, S.
Charnley, S. Coulthard, N. Dolšak, J. Donatuto, C. García-
Quijano, C. C. Hicks, A. Levine, M. B. Mascia, K. Norman, M.
Poe, T. Satterfield, K. St. Martin, and P . S. Levin. 2016.
Conceptualizing and operationalizing human wellbeing for
ecosystem assessment and management. Environmental Science
and Policy 66:250-259. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2016.06.023  
Brown, G., and C. Raymond. 2007. The relationship between
place attachment and landscape values: toward mapping place
attachment. Applied Geography 27(2):89-111. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2006.11.002  
Brown, K., S. O’Neill, and C. Fabricius. 2013. Social science
understandings of transformation. Pages 100-106 in World social
science report 2013: changing global environments. ISSC and
UNESCO, Paris, France. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264203419-13-
en  
Butler, C. D., and W . Oluoch-Kosura. 2006. Linking future
ecosystem services and future human well-being. Ecology and
Society 11(1):30. http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/es-01602-110130  
Ecology and Society 22(1): 49
https://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol22/iss1/art49/
Carpenter, S. R., H. A. Mooney, J. Agard, D. Capistrano, R. S.
DeFries, S. Díaz, T. Dietz, A. K. Duraiappah, A. Oteng-Y eboah,
H. M. Pereira, C. Perrings, W . V . Reid, J. Sarukhan, R. J. Scholes,
and A. Whyte. 2009. Science for managing ecosystem services:
beyond the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 106(5):1305-1312. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0808772106  
Chan, K. M. A., P . Balvanera, K. Benessaiah, M. Chapman, S.
Díaz, E. Gómez-Baggethun, R. Gould, N. Hannahs, K. Jax, S.
Klain, G. W . Luck, B. Martín-López, B. Muraca, B. Norton, K.
Ott, U. Pascual, T. Satterfield, M. Tadaki, J. Taggart, and N.
Turner. 2016. Opinion: Why protect nature? Rethinking values
and the environment. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 113(6):1462-1465. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1525002113  
Chan, K. M. A., A. D. Guerry, P . Balvanera, S. Klain, T.
Satterfield, X. Basurto, A. Bostrom, R. Chuenpagdee, R. Gould,
B. S. Halpern, N. Hannahs, J. Levine, B. Norton, M. Ruckelshaus,
R. Russell, J. Tam, and U. Woodside. 2012. Where are cultural 
and social in ecosystem services? A framework for constructive
engagement. BioScience 62(8):744-756. http://dx.doi.org/10.1525/
bio.2012.62.8.7  
Chapin, F . S. III, S. R. Carpenter, G. P . Kofinas, C. Folke, N. Abel,
W . C. Clark, P . Olsson, D. M. Stafford Smith, B. Walker, O. R.
Y oung, F . Berkes, R. Biggs, J. M. Grove, R. L. Naylor, E.
Pinkerton, W . Steffen, and F . J. Swanson. 2010. Ecosystem
stewardship: sustainability strategies for a rapidly changing
planet. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 25(4):241-249. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2009.10.008  
Chapin, F . S. III, and C. N. Knapp. 2015. Sense of place: a process
for identifying and negotiating potentially contested visions of
sustainability. Environmental Science and Policy 53(A):38-46.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2015.04.012  
Chapin, F . S. III, A. F . Mark, R. A. Mitchell, and K. J. M.
Dickinson. 2012. Design principles for social-ecological
transformation toward sustainability: lessons from New Zealand
sense of place. Ecosphere 3(5):1-22. http://dx.doi.org/10.1890/
es12-00009.1  
Chapin, F . S. III, S. T. A. Pickett, M. E. Power, R. B. Jackson, D.
M. Carter, and C. Duke. 2011. Earth stewardship: a strategy for
social-ecological transformation to reverse planetary degradation.
Journal of Environmental Studies and Sciences 1(1):44-53. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/s13412-011-0010-7  
Clayton, S., P . Devine-Wright, P . C. Stern, L. Whitmarsh, A.
Carrico, L. Steg, J. Swim, and M. Bonnes. 2015. Psychological
research and global climate change. Nature Climate Change 
5:640-646. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2622  
Daniel, T. C., A. Muhar, A. Arnberger, O. Aznar, J. W . Boyd, K.
M. A. Chan, R. Costanza, T. Elmqvist, C. G. Flint, P . H. Gobster,
A. Grêt-Regamey, R. Lave, S. Muhar, M. Penker, R. G. Ribe, T.
Schauppenlehner, T. Sikor, I. Soloviy, M. Spierenburg, K.
Taczanowska, J. Tam, and A. von der Dunk. 2012. Contributions
of cultural services to the ecosystem services agenda. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 109(23):8812-8819. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1114773109  
Davenport, M. A., and D. H. Anderson. 2005. Getting from sense
of place to place-based management: an interpretive investigation
of place meanings and perceptions of landscape change. Society
and Natural Resources 18(7):625-641. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1080/08941920590959613  
Davidson-Hunt, I. J., and F . Berkes. 2003. Nature and society
through the lens of resilience: toward a human-in-ecosystem
perspective. Pages 53-82 in F . Berkes, J. Colding, and C. Folke,
editors. Navigating social-ecological systems: building resilience
for complexity and change. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511541957.006  
Daw, T., K. Brown, S. Rosendo, and R. Pomeroy. 2011. Applying
the ecosystem services concept to poverty alleviation: the need to
disaggregate human well-being. Environmental Conservation 38
(4):370-379. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0376892911000506  
Devine-Wright, P . 2009. Rethinking NIMBYism: the role of place
attachment and place identity in explaining place-protective
action. Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology 19
(6):426-441. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/casp.1004  
Devine-Wright, P ., and Y . Howes. 2010. Disruption to place
attachment and the protection of restorative environments: a
wind energy case study. Journal of Environmental Psychology 30
(3):271-280. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2010.01.008  
Devine-Wright, P ., J. Price, and Z. Leviston. 2015. My country or
my planet? Exploring the influence of multiple place attachments
and ideological beliefs upon climate change attitudes and
opinions. Global Environmental Change 30:68-79. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.10.012  
Eakin, H., A. Y ork, R. Aggarwal, S. Waters, J. Welch, C. Rubiños,
S. Smith-Heisters, C. Bausch, and J. M. Anderies. 2016. Cognitive
and institutional influences on farmers’ adaptive capacity:
insights into barriers and opportunities for transformative change
in central Arizona. Regional Environmental Change 16
(3):801-814. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10113-015-0789-y  
Enqvist, J., M. Tengö, and Ö. Bodin. 2014. Citizen networks in
the Garden City: protecting urban ecosystems in rapid
urbanization. Landscape and Urban Planning 130:24-35. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2014.06.007  
Enqvist, J., M. Tengö, and W . J. Boonstra. 2016. Against the
current: rewiring rigidity trap dynamics in urban water
governance through civic engagement. Sustainability Science 11
(6):919-933. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11625-016-0377-1  
Ernstson, H., and S. Sörlin. 2009. Weaving protective stories:
connective practices to articulate holistic values in the Stockholm
National Urban Park. Environment and Planning 41
(6):1460-1479. http://dx.doi.org/10.1068/a40349  
Farmer, J. R., D. Knapp, V . J. Meretsky, C. Chancellor, and B. C.
Fischer. 2011. Motivations influencing the adoption of
conservation easements. Conservation Biology 25(4):827-834.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1523-1739.2011.01686.x  
Folke, C. 2006. Resilience: the emergence of a perspective for
social-ecological systems analyses. Global Environmental Change 
16(3):253-267. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2006.04.002  
Ecology and Society 22(1): 49
https://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol22/iss1/art49/
Folke, C., S. R. Carpenter, B. Walker, M. Scheffer, T. Chapin, and
J. Rockström. 2010. Resilience thinking: integrating resilience,
adaptability and transformability. Ecology and Society 15(4):20.
[online] URL: http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol15/iss4/
art20/  
Folke, C., J. Colding, and F . Berkes. 2003. Synthesis: building
resilience and adaptive capacity in social-ecolgocial systems.
Pages 352-387 in F . Berkes, J. Colding, and C. Folke, editors.
Navigating social-ecological systems: building resilience for
complexity and change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511541957.020  
Folke, C., T. Hahn, P . Olsson, and J. Norberg. 2005. Adaptive
governance of social-ecological systems. Annual Review of
Environment and Resources 30:441-473. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/
annurev.energy.30.050504.144511   
Folke, C., Å. Jansson, J. Rockström, P . Olsson, S. R. Carpenter,
F . S. Chapin III, A.-S. Crépin, G. Daily, K. Danell, J. Ebbesson,
T. Elmqvist, V . Galaz, F . Moberg, M. Nilsson, H. Österblom, E.
Ostrom, Å. Persson, G. Peterson, S. Polasky, W . Steffen, B. Walker,
and F . Westley. 2011. Reconnecting to the biosphere. Ambio 
40:719-738. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s13280-011-0184-y  
Fresque-Baxter, J. A., and D. Armitage. 2012. Place identity and
climate change adaptation: a synthesis and framework for
understanding. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change 
3(3):251-266. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/wcc.164  
Freudenburg, W . R., S. Frickel, and R. Gramling. 1995. Beyond
the nature/society divide: learning to think about a mountain.
Sociological Forum 10(3):361-392. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
BF02095827  
Gifford, R. 2014. Environmental psychology matters. Annual
Review of Psychology 65:541-579. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/
annurev-psych-010213-115048  
Greider, T., and L. Garkovich. 1994. Landscapes: the social
construction of nature and the environment. Rural Sociology 59
(1):1-24. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1549-0831.1994.tb00519.x  
Gunderson, L. H. 2003. Adaptive dancing: interactions between
social resilience and ecological crises. Pages 33-52 in F . Berkes, J.
Colding, and C. Folke, editors. Navigating social-ecological
systems: building resilience for complexity and change. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK. https://doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9780511541957.005  
Gunderson, L. H., and C. S. Holling, editors. 2002. Panarchy:
understanding transformations in human and natural systems. 
Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.  
Hausmann, A., R. Slotow, J. K. Burns, and E. Di Minin. 2016.
The ecosystem service of sense of place: benefits for human well-
being and biodiversity conservation. Environmental Conservation 
43(2):117-127. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/s0376892915000314  
Heise, U. K. 2008. Sense of place and sense of planet: the
environmental imagination of the global. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, UK. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/97801953356­
37.001.0001   
Hernández-Morcillo, M., T. Plieninger, and C. Bieling. 2013. An
empirical review of cultural ecosystem service indicators.
Ecological Indicators 29:434-444. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecolind.2013.01.013  
Hidalgo, M. C., and B. Hernández. 2001. Place attachment:
conceptual and empirical questions. Journal of Environmental
Psychology 21(3):273-281. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jevp.2001.0221  
Huber, M., and A. Arnberger. 2016. Opponents, waverers or
supporters: the influence of place-attachment dimensions on
local residents’ acceptance of a planned biosphere reserve in
Austria. Journal of Environmental Planning and Management 59
(9):1610-1628. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09640568.2015.1083415  
Ingalls, M. L., and R. C. Stedman. 2016. The power problematic:
exploring the uncertain terrains of political ecology and the
resilience framework. Ecology and Society 21(1):6. http://dx.doi.
org/10.5751/es-08124-210106  
Jacquet, J. B., and R. C. Stedman. 2013. Perceived impacts from
wind farm and natural gas development in northern
Pennsylvania. Rural Sociology 78(4):450-472. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/ruso.12022  
Jacquet, J. B., and R. C. Stedman. 2014. The risk of social-
psychological disruption as an impact of energy development and
environmental change. Journal of Environmental Planning and
Management 57(9):1285-1304. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/096405­
68.2013.820174  
Jones, N. A., S. Shaw, H. Ross, K. Witt, and B. Pinner. 2016. The
study of human values in understanding and managing social-
ecological systems. Ecology and Society 21(1):15. http://dx.doi.
org/10.5751/es-07977-210115  
Jorgensen, B. S., and R. C. Stedman. 2001. Sense of place as an
attitude: lakeshore owners attitudes toward their properties.
Journal of Environmental Psychology 21(3):233-248. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1006/jevp.2001.0226  
Kaltenborn, B. P . 1998. Effects of sense of place on responses to
environmental impacts: a study among residents in Svalbard in
the Norwegian high Arctic. Applied Geography 18(2):169-189.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0143-6228(98)00002-2  
Keilty, K., T. M. Beckley, and K. Sherren. 2016. Baselines of
acceptability and generational change on the Mactaquac
hydroelectric dam headpond (New Brunswick, Canada).
Geoforum 75:234-248. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2016.08.001  
Kudryavtsev, A., R. C. Stedman, and M. E. Krasny. 2012. Sense
of place in environmental education. Environmental Education
Research 18(2):229-250. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13504622.2011.609615  
Kyle, G., A. Graefe, R. Manning, and J. Bacon. 2004. Effects of
place attachment on users’ perceptions of social and
environmental conditions in a natural setting. Journal of
Environmental Psychology 24(2):213-225. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jenvp.2003.12.006  
Lalli, M. 1992. Urban-related identity: theory, measurement, and
empirical findings. Journal of Environmental Psychology 12
(4):285-303. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0272-4944(05)80078-7  
Larson, S., D. M. De Freitas, and C. C. Hicks. 2013. Sense of
place as a determinant of people’s attitudes towards the
environment: implications for natural resources management and
Ecology and Society 22(1): 49
https://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol22/iss1/art49/
planning in the Great Barrier Reef, Australia. Journal of
Environmental Management 117:226-234. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jenvman.2012.11.035  
Leach, M., J. Rockström, P . Raskin, I. Scoones, A. C. Stirling, A.
Smith, J. Thompson, E. Millstone, A. Ely, E. Arond, C. Folke,
and P . Olsson. 2012. Transforming innovation for sustainability.
Ecology and Society 17(2):11. http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/
es-04933-170211  
Lewicka, M. 2011. Place attachment: How far have we come in
the last 40 years? Journal of Environmental Psychology 31
(3):207-230. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2010.10.001  
Liu, J., T. Dietz, S. R. Carpenter, M. Alberti, C. Folke, E. Moran,
A. N. Pell, P . Deadman, T. Kratz, J. Lubchenco, E. Ostrom, Z.
Ouyang, W . Provencher, C. L. Redman, S. H. Schneider, and W .
W . Taylor. 2007. Complexity of coupled human and natural
systems. Science 317(5844):1513-1516. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/
science.1144004  
Lyon, C. 2014. Place systems and social resilience: a framework
for understanding place in social adaptation, resilience, and
transformation. Society and Natural Resources 27(10):1009-1023.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08941920.2014.918228  
Manzo, L. C. 2005. For better or worse: exploring multiple
dimensions of place meaning. Journal of Environmental
Psychology 25(1):67-86. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2005.01.002  
Marshall, N. A., S. Crimp, M. Curnock, M. Greenhill, G. Kuehne,
Z. Leviston, and J. Ouzman. 2016. Some primary producers are
more likely to transform their agricultural practices in response
to climate change than others. Agriculture, Ecosystems and
Environment 222:38-47. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2016.02.004  
Marshall, N. A., S. E. Park, W . N. Adger, K. Brown, and S. M.
Howden. 2012. Transformational capacity and the influence of
place and identity. Environmental Research Letters 7(3):034022.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/7/3/034022  
Marshall, N., and C. J. Stokes. 2014. Identifying thresholds and
barriers to adaptation through measuring climate sensitivity and
capacity to change in an Australian primary industry. Climatic
Change 126(3):399-411. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10584-014-1233-
x  
Martín-López, B., I. Iniesta-Arandia, M. García-Llorente, I.
Palomo, I. Casado-Arzuaga, D. García Del Amo, E. Gómez-
Baggethun, E. Oteros-Rozas, I. Palacios-Agundez, B. Willaarts,
J. A. González, F . Santos-Martín, M. Onaindia, C. López-
Santiago, and C. Montes. 2012. Uncovering ecosystem service
bundles through social preferences. Plos One 7(6):e38970. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0038970  
Masterson, V . A. 2016. Sense of place and culture in the landscape
of home: understanding social-ecological dynamics on the Wild
Coast, South Africa. Dissertation. Stockholm Resilience Centre,
Stockholm University, Sweden. [online] URL: http://su.diva-
portal.org/smash/record.jsf?pid=diva2%3A1044090&dswid=-5802  
Meyfroidt, P . 2013. Environmental cognitions, land change, and
social-ecological feedbacks: an overview. Journal of Land Use
Science 8(3):341-367. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1747423x.2012.667452  
Milcu, A. I., J. Hanspach, D. Abson, and J. Fischer. 2013. Cultural
ecosystem services: a literature review and prospects for future
research. Ecology and Society 18(3):44. http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/
es-05790-180344  
Milcu, A. I., K. Sherren, J. Hanspach, D. Abson, and J. Fischer.
2014. Navigating conflicting landscape aspirations: application
of a photo-based Q-method in Transylvania (central Romania).
Land Use Policy 41:408-422. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
landusepol.2014.06.019  
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 2005. Ecosystems and human
well-being: synthesis. Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
[online] URL: http://www.millenniumassessment.org/documents/
document.356.aspx.pdf  
Moore, R. L., and A. R. Graefe. 1994. Attachments to recreation
settings: the case of rail-trail users. Leisure Sciences 16(1):17-31.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01490409409513214  
Nassauer, J. I. 2011. Care and stewardship: from home to planet.
Landscape and Urban Planning 100(4):321-323. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2011.02.022  
Olsson, P ., and C. Folke. 2001. Local ecological knowledge and
institutional dynamics for ecosystem management: a study of
Lake Racken watershed, Sweden. Ecosystems 4(2):85-104. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/s100210000061   
Pauly, D. 1995. Anecdotes and the shifting baseline syndrome of
fisheries. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 10(10):430. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/s0169-5347(00)89171-5  
Plieninger, T., S. Dijks, E. Oteros-Rozas, and C. Bieling. 2013.
Assessing, mapping, and quantifying cultural ecosystem services
at community level. Land Use Policy 33:118-129. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2012.12.013  
Potschin, M., and R. Haines-Y oung. 2013. Landscapes,
sustainability and the place-based analysis of ecosystem services.
Landscape Ecology 28(6):1053-1065. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s10980-012-9756-x  
Pred, A. 1984. Place as historically contingent process:
structuration and the time-geography of becoming places. Annals
of the Association of American Geographers 74(2):279-297. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8306.1984.tb01453.x  
Pretty, G. H., H. M. Chipuer, and P . Bramston 2003. Sense of
place amongst adolescents and adults in two rural Australian
towns: the discriminating features of place attachment, sense of
community and place dependence in relation to place identity.
Journal of Environmental Psychology 23(3):273-287. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/s0272-4944(02)00079-8  
Pröpper, M., and F . Haupts. 2014. The culturality of ecosystem
services. Emphasizing process and transformation. Ecological
Economics 108:28-35. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2014.09.023  
Proshansky, H. M. 1978. The city and self-identity. Environment
and Behavior 10(2):147-169. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0013916578102002  
Quinn, T. 2014. The role of place attachment in proactive and
reactive adaptation to flood risk. Dissertation. University of East
Anglia, Norwich, UK. [online] URL: https://ueaeprints.uea.ac.
uk/49467/  
Ecology and Society 22(1): 49
https://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol22/iss1/art49/
Raudsepp-Hearne, C., G. D. Peterson, M. Tengö, E. M. Bennett,
T. Holland, K. Benessaiah, G. K. MacDonald, and L. Pfeifer.
2010. Untangling the environmentalist’s paradox: Why is human
well-being increasing as ecosystem services degrade? BioScience 
60(8):576-589. http://dx.doi.org/10.1525/bio.2010.60.8.4  
Raymond, C. M., G. Brown, and G. M. Robinson. 2011. The
influence of place attachment, and moral and normative concerns
on the conservation of native vegetation: a test of two behavioural
models. Journal of Environmental Psychology 31(4):323-335.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2011.08.006  
Raymond, C. M., B. A. Bryan, D. Hatton MacDonald, A. Cast,
S. Strathearn, A. Grandgirard, and T. Kalivas. 2009. Mapping
community values for natural capital and ecosystem services.
Ecological Economics 68(5):1301-1315. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.ecolecon.2008.12.006  
Raymond, C. M., G. G. Singh, K. Benessaiah, J. R. Bernhardt, J.
Levine, H. Nelson, N. J. Turner, B. Norton, J. Tam, and K. M. A.
Chan. 2013. Ecosystem services and beyond: using multiple
metaphors to understand human-environment relationships.
BioScience 63(7):536-546.  
Relph, E. 1976. Place and placelessness. Pion, London, UK.  
Reyers, B., R. Biggs, G. S. Cumming, T. Elmqvist, A. P . Hejnowicz,
and S. Polasky. 2013. Getting the measure of ecosystem services:
a social-ecological approach. Frontiers in Ecology and the
Environment 11(5):268-273. http://dx.doi.org/10.1890/120144  
Rickard, L. N., and R. C. Stedman. 2015. From ranger talks to
radio stations: the role of communication in sense of place.
Journal of Leisure Research 47(1):15-33.  
Russ, A., S. J. Peters, M. E. Krasny, and R. C. Stedman. 2015.
Development of ecological place meaning in New Y ork City.
Journal of Environmental Education 46(2):73-93. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1080/00958964.2014.999743  
Russell, R., A. D. Guerry, P . Balvanera, R. K. Gould, X. Basurto,
K. M. A. Chan, S. Klain, J. Levine, and J. Tam. 2013. Humans
and nature: how knowing and experiencing nature affect well-
being. Annual Review of Environment and Resources 38
(1):473-502. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-environ-012312-110838  
Sack, R. D. 1997. Homo geographicus: a framework for action,
awareness, and moral concern. Johns Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.  
Sampson, K., and C. Goodrich. 2005. “We’re coasters, why should
we move?”: community identity, place attachment and forestry
closure in rural New Zealand. Sites 2(1):24-49. http://dx.doi.
org/10.11157/sites-vol2iss1id55  
Scannell, L., and R. Gifford. 2010. The relations between natural
and civic place attachment and pro-environmental behavior.
Journal of Environmental Psychology 30(3):289-297. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2010.01.010  
Seamon, D. 2000. A way of seeing people and place:
phenomenology in envrionment-behavior research. Page 157-178
in S. Wapner, J. Demick, C. T. Yamamoto, and H. Minami, editors.
Theoretical perspectives in environment-behavior research. 
Springer, New Y ork, New Y ork, USA. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/978-1-4615-4701-3_13  
Shamai, S. 1991. Sense of place: an empirical measurement.
Geoforum 22(3):347-358. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0016-7185
(91)90017-k  
Smith, L. M., J. L. Case, H. M. Smith, L. C. Harwell, and J. K.
Summers. 2013. Relating ecoystem services to domains of human
well-being: foundation for a U.S. index. Ecological Indicators 
28:79-90. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2012.02.032  
Stedman, R. C. 1999. Sense of place as indicator of community
sustainability. Forestry Chronicle 75(5):765-770. http://dx.doi.
org/10.5558/tfc75765-5  
Stedman, R. C. 2002. Toward a psychology of place: predicting
behavior from place-based cognitions, attitude, and identity.
Environment and Behavior 34(5):561-581. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/0013916502034005001  
Stedman, R. C. 2003 a. Is it really just a social construction?: The
contribution of the physical environment to sense of place.
Society and Natural Resources 16(8):671-685.  
Stedman, R. C. 2003 b. Sense of place and forest science: toward
a program of quantitative research. Forest Science 49(6):822-829.  
Stedman, R. C. 2006. Understanding place attachment among
second home owners. American Behavioral Scientist 50
(2):187-205. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0002764206290633  
Stedman, R. C. 2008. What do we “mean” by place meanings?
Implications of place meanings for managers and practitioners.
Pages 71-82 in L. E. Kruger, T. E. Hall, and M. C. Stiefel, editors.
Understanding concepts of place in recreation research and
management. General Technical Report PNW-GTR-744. U.S.
Department of Agriculture Forest Service Pacific Northwest
Research Station, Portland, Oregon, USA. [online] URL: https://
www.treesearch.fs.fed.us/pubs/29924  
Stedman, R. C. 2016. Subjectivity and social-ecological systems:
a rigidity trap (and sense of place as a way out). Sustainability
Science 11(6):891-901. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11625-016-0388-
y  
Stedman, R. C., and T. M. Beckley. 2007. “If we knew what it was
we were doing, it would not be called research, would it?” Society
and Natural Resources 20(10):939-943.  
Stedman, R. C., and R. B. Hammer. 2006. Environmental
perception in a rapidly growing, amenity-rich region: the effects
of lakeshore development on perceived water quality in Vilas
County, Wisconsin. Society and Natural Resources 19(2):137-151.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08941920500394733  
Stedman, R. C., and M. Ingalls. 2014. Topophilia, biophilia and
greening in the red zone. Pages 129-144 in K. G. Tidball and M.
E. Krasny, editors. Greening in the red zon: disaster, resilience and
community greening. Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-90-481-9947-1_10  
Stokols, D., and S. A. Shumaker. 1981. People in places: a
transactional view of settings. Pages 441-488 in J. H. Harvey,
editor. Cognition, social behavior, and the environment. Lawrence
Erlbaum, Hillsdale, New Jersey, USA.  
Stokowski, P . A. 2002. Languages of place and discourses of
power: constructing new senses of place. Journal of Leisure
Research 34(4):368-382.  
Ecology and Society 22(1): 49
https://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol22/iss1/art49/
Summers, J. K., L. M. Smith, J. L. Case, and R. A. Linthurst.
2012. A review of the elements of human well-being with an
emphasis on the contribution of ecosystem services. Ambio 41
(4):327-340. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s13280-012-0256-7  
Tengö, M., and J. von Heland. 2011. Adaptive capacity of local
indigenous institutions: the case of the taboo forests of southern
Madagascar. Pages 37-74 in E. Boyd and C. Folke, editors.
Adapting institutions: governance, complexity and social-
ecological resilience. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139017237.006  
Theodori, G. L. 2001. Examining the effects of community
satisfaction and attachment on individual well-being. Rural
Sociology 66(4):618-628. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1549-0831.2001.
tb00087.x   
Tidball, K. G. 2012. Urgent biophilia: human-nature interactions
and biological attractions in disaster resilience. Ecology and
Society 17(2):5. http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/es-04596-170205  
Tidball, K. G., and M. Krasny. 2014. Greening in the red zone:
disaster, resilience, and community greening. Springer, Dordrecht,
The Netherlands. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-90-481-9947-1  
Tidball, K., and R. Stedman. 2013. Positive dependency and
virtuous cycles: from resource dependence to resilience in urban
social-ecological systems. Ecological Economics 86:292-299.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2012.10.004  
Trentelman, C. K. 2009. Place attachment and community
attachment: a primer grounded in the lived experience of a
community sociologist. Society and Natural Resources 22
(3):191-210. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08941920802191712  
Tuan, Y .-F . 1977. Space and place: the perspective of experience. 
University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.  
United Nations. 2014. Open Working Group proposal for
sustainable development goals. A/68/970. Open Working Group
of the General Assembly on Sustainable Development Goals,
United Nations, New Y ork, New Y ork, USA. [online] URL:
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/1579SDGs%
20Proposal.pdf  
von Heland, J., and C. Folke. 2014. A social contract with the
ancestors—culture and ecosystem services in southern
Madagascar. Global Environmental Change 24:251-264. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.11.003  
Vorkinn, M., and H. Riese. 2001. Environmental concern in a
local context: the significance of place attachment. Environment
and Behavior 33(2):249-263. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/00139160­
121972972  
Walker, B., C. S. Holling, S. R. Carpenter, and A. Kinzig. 2004.
Resilience, adaptability and transformability in social-ecological
systems. Ecology and Society 9(2):5. http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/
es-00650-090205  
Westley, F ., P . Olsson, C. Folke, T. Homer-Dixon, H. Vredenburg,
D. Loorbach, J. Thompson, M. Nilsson, E. Lambin, J. Sendzimir,
B. Banerjee, V . Galaz, and S. van der Leeuw. 2011. Tipping toward
sustainability: emerging pathways of transformation. Ambio 40
(7):762-780. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s13280-011-0186-9  
Wilbanks, T. J. 2015. Putting “place” in a multiscale context:
perspectives from the sustainability sciences. Environmental
Science and Policy 53(A):70-79. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsci.2015.04.009  
Williams, D. R., and M. E. Patterson. 2007. Snapshots of what,
exactly? A comment on methodological experimentation and
conceptual foundations in place research. Society and Natural
Resources 20(10):931-937. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08941920701537015  
Williams, D. R., and J. W . Roggenbuck. 1989. Measuring place
attachment: some preliminary results. Page 32 in L. H. McAvoy
and D. Howard, editors. Abstracts of the 1989 Leisure Research
Symposium. National Recreation and Park Association,
Arlington, Virginia, USA.  
Yung, L., W . A. Freimund, and J. M. Belsky. 2003. The politics
of place: understanding meaning, common ground, and political
difference on the Rocky Mountain front. Forest Science 49
(6):855-866.  
Zukin, S. 1991. Landscapes of power: from Detroit to Disney World. 
University of California Press, Berkeley, California, USA.  
Zylstra, M. J., A. T. Knight, K. J. Esler, and L. L. L. Le Grange.
2014. Connectedness as a core conservation concern: an
interdisciplinary review of theory and a call for practice. Springer
Science Reviews 2(1):119-143. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s40362-014-0021-3