fpsyg-08-01674 September 27, 2017 Time: 16:55 # 1
CONCEPTUAL ANAL YSIS
published: 29 September 2017
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01674
Edited by:
Marino Bonaiuto,
Sapienza Università di Roma, Italy
Reviewed by:
Mirilia Bonnes,
Sapienza Università di Roma, Italy
Patrick Devine-Wright,
University of Exeter, United Kingdom
*Correspondence:
Christopher M. Raymond
christopher.raymond@slu.se
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Environmental Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 02 June 2017
Accepted: 11 September 2017
Published: 29 September 2017
Citation:
Raymond CM, Kyttä M and
Stedman R (2017) Sense of Place,
Fast and Slow: The Potential
Contributions of Affordance Theory
to Sense of Place.
Front. Psychol. 8:1674.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01674
Sense of Place, Fast and Slow: The
Potential Contributions of Affordance
Theory to Sense of Place
Christopher M. Raymond 1*, Marketta Kyttä 2 and Richard Stedman 3
1 Department of Landscape Architecture, Planning and Management, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala,
Sweden, 2 Department of Built Environment, Aalto University, Espoo, Finland, 3 Department of Natural Resources, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY , United States
Over the past 40 years, the sense of place concept has been well-established across
a range of applications and settings; however, most theoretical developments have
“privileged the slow.” Evidence suggests that place attachments and place meanings
are slow to evolve, sometimes not matching material or social reality (lag effects), and
also tending to inhibit change. Here, we present some key blind spots in sense of
place scholarship and then suggest how a reconsideration of sense of place as “fast”
and “slow” could ﬁll them. By this, we mean how direct and immediate perception–
action processes presented in affordance theory (resulting in immediately perceived
place meanings) can complement slower forms of social construction presented in
sense of place scholarship. Key blind spots are that sense of place scholarship: (1)
rarely accounts for sensory or immediately perceived meanings; (2) pays little attention
to how place meanings are the joint product of attributes of environmental features
and the attributes of the individual; and (3) assumes that the relationship between
place attachment and behavior is linear and not constituted in dynamic relations
among mind, culture, and environment. We show how these blind spots can begin
to be addressed by reviewing key insights from affordance theory, and through the
presentation of applied examples. We discuss future empirical research directions in
terms of: (1) how sense of place is both perceived and socially constructed; (2) whether
perceived and socially constructed dimensions of place can relate to one another when
perceived meanings become unsituated; and (3) how place attachment may change
over different stages of the life course based upon dynamic relationships between
processes of perception–action and social construction. We conclude with insights into
how processes of perception–action and social construction could be included in the
design and management of urban landscapes.
Keywords: ecological psychology, place meanings, human–environment relationships, place attachment,
embodied cognition, affordances, dual-process models
INTRODUCTION
Interest in sense of place has grown rapidly in recent years, with the concept extended from leisure
and recreation to a wide range of applications and settings. The concept broadly describes human
connection to places, including place attachment and place meaning (Stedman, 2003; Farnum et al.,
2005; Smaldone et al., 2005). Place attachment refers to the emotional bonds between an individual
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1674
fpsyg-08-01674 September 27, 2017 Time: 16:55 # 2
Raymond et al. Sense of Place Blind Spots
and a geographic locale, or how strongly a person is connected
to a place (Low and Altman, 1992; Jorgensen and Stedman, 2001;
Raymond et al., 2010), whereas place meaning is the descriptive,
symbolic meaning that people ascribe to a place (Smaldone et al.,
2008; Stedman, 2008, 2016).
Historically, sense of place research, including emphases on
both meaning and attachment ( Figure 1 ), has “privileged the
slow.” We see this in the “conservativism” of place critique(s)
which views place meanings as slow to evolve, sometimes not
matching material or social reality (lag eﬀects), and also place
meanings as tending to inhibit change (the maladaptive nature of
place meanings) (Marshall et al., 2012; Stedman, 2016; Masterson
et al., 2017). It is also generally accepted that place attachment
endures over time (Giuliani, 2003; Lewicka, 2011), and slowly
changes in intensity or structure with one’s length of residence
in a given place (Hammitt et al., 2004; Brown and Raymond,
2007), or waxing and waning over the course of one’s connection
to a place (Smaldone et al., 2008). Its stability can be aﬀected by
life stage (Elder et al., 1996), by economic, social, political, and
other external disruptions to a place (Brown and Perkins, 1992;
Feldman, 1996; Devine-Wright, 2009), and across short-term and
long-term residents (Kaltenborn and Williams, 2002; Stedman,
2006). Despite these limited engagements of variability, the
general tendency in research has been to emphasize the steady,
“slow” development of strong attachments and stable meanings.
Within sense of place scholarship, Williams (2014a) identiﬁes
two branches of enquiry: “place as a locus of attachment”
and place as a “center of meaning” ( Figure 1 ). The former
refers to an operational construct designed to measure the
intensity or strength of a bond to a geographic locale. Scholars
rarely acknowledge that this branch of enquiry is based on
an interactionist worldview in psychology (Altman and Rogoﬀ,
1987). In this worldview: (1) reality comes divided into subjects
and objects in that aspects of the environment are seen as
independent of the properties of human minds or bodies
(Altman and Rogoﬀ, 1987; Lakoﬀ and Johnson, 1999); (2)
the individual is driven by factors located outside in the
surroundings, including biological determinants; and (3) the
bases for change in the state of the individual are the impacts
stemming from entities and conditions in the surroundings, as
well pushes from within the individual (Heft, 2013). Researchers
commonly employ top-down information processing strategies
using deductive approaches. Contextual information is used
as “inputs” (in the forms of cognitions, beliefs, attitudes, or
other mental representations about a place, see Williams, 2014a)
in order to create meaningful mental perceptions (“output”)
(Bernstein, 2010).
In contrast, “place as a center of meaning” refers to the
broader processes of meaning-making, and how to characterize
experience, meaning, and relationships to places in more
experiential qualitative terms (Williams, 2014a). Emphasis is
placed on an interpretative approach to cognition (Bruner, 1990),
with hermeneutic, discursive, dialogical, or phenomenological
research paradigms used to interpret how place meanings form,
or are collectively shared, disseminated and deployed (see
Table 1 and section “Sense of Place Scholarship Rarely Accounts
for Sensory or Immediately Perceived Meanings” for further
explanation).
Regardless of diﬀerences between the above perspectives, they
have in common a general emphasis on “slow” progression of
meanings and attachment, and are often interested in the social
construction of meaning. Unlike in the sense of place scholarship,
FIGURE 1 | Three perspectives of place considered in this paper.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1674
fpsyg-08-01674 September 27, 2017 Time: 16:55 # 3
Raymond et al. Sense of Place Blind Spots
TABLE 1 | An overview of the differing approaches to sense of place and affordance scholarship.
Foci of place Research strategy Different research paradigms or approaches used to understand place
Sense of place scholarship
(privileges the “slow”)
Place as a center of
meaning (focus on place
meaning)
Inductive. We interpret how
place meanings individually
form and/or are collectively
shared, disseminated, and
deployed
Hermeneutic approach.
Meaning is generated in the
individual subjective mind
through the interpretation of
texts. Place has to be
interpreted in order to
reveal a deeper meaning.
Landscape legibility is
therefore a key to
understanding place
meaning (Drenthen, 2011).
Discursive approach. Place
meanings are treated as a
social practice that cannot be
understood outside of
interactional, cultural, and
institutional contexts in which
they emerge. They are formed
through everyday language use
and social practice and have
signiﬁcant rhetorical relevance
(Di Masso et al., 2014).
Dialogical approach.
“Meaning arises out of the
relationship between an act
and those trying to
understand it – it is the
product of an interaction of
two subjects” (Fay, 1996,
p. 142). Dialogical
approaches highlight the
central role of actions and
practices in producing
place meaning (West,
2016).
Phenomenological
approach. A holistic
approach to cognition
whereby individual or group
actions, experiences,
intentions, and meanings
are drawn together spatially
(Relph, 1976; Casey,
2009). Emphasize
subjective place
experience, deep emotional
ties, and individually
constructed place meaning
(Tuan, 1974, 1977, 1980;
Relph, 1976) often created
through lived experience
(Seamon, 2014).
Place as a locus of
attachment (focus on place
attachment)
Top-down information
processing/deductive. We
use contextual information
as “inputs” [in the form of
cognitions, beliefs,
attitudes, or other mental
representations about a
place (Williams, 2014a)] in
order to create meaningful,
mental perceptions
(“output”) (Bernstein, 2010).
Computational level. What
is the goal of the
computation? What
problems does the system
solve or overcome? (Marr,
1982; David et al., 2004).
For example, what is the
goal behind forming certain
attitudes or beliefs about
place?
Algorithmic-representation
level. What representations
does the system use and what
processes are employed to
manipulate inputs and outputs
(Marr, 1982; Bechtel, 2008).
For example, what is the
dimensionality of place
attachment (Kyle et al., 2004;
Lewicka, 2005, 2010;
Raymond et al., 2010) and how
do these dimensions affect
behavior (Stedman, 2003;
Raymond et al., 2011)?
Implementation level. How
is the system physically
realized in the human brain
(David et al., 2004)? For
example, how is place
attachment realized in the
human brain? We are not
aware of any place
attachment studies in this
area of cognitive
neuroscience.
Affordance scholarship
(privileges the “fast”)
Place as a
perception-action process
(focus on affordances)
Bottom-up information
processing. Perception
starts at the stimulus. The
real world provides
sufﬁcient contextual
information for our visual
systems to directly perceive
what is there, unmediated
by the inﬂuence of higher
cognitive processes
(Gibson, 1979).
Individual perspective.
Affordances exist by virtue
of a relationship between
the physical properties of
the world and the action
capabilities of the individual
(Gibson, 1979; Jongeneel
et al., 2015).
Social perspective. For some scholars, a type
of affordances exist that are social and that take
the form of possibilities for coordinated
behavior (e.g., Shockley et al., 2009; Wiltshire
et al., 2014). However, it is more commonly
assumed that all affordances are “social”
because they belong to a shared reality and are
bound up with normatively constrained social
practices (Kiverstein, 2015).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1674
fpsyg-08-01674 September 27, 2017 Time: 16:55 # 4
Raymond et al. Sense of Place Blind Spots
there is a wider body of literature in Ecological Psychology
which “engages the fast, ” as reﬂected in the theory of aﬀordances
(Figure 1 ). An aﬀordance refers to the “possibility for action”
provided to an individual by an environment – by the substances,
surfaces, objects, and other living creatures that surround the
social actor (Gibson, 1979). Aﬀordances are the result of real-time
or direct perception–action processes in that they depend on the
existence of an organism that can perceive them and the actions
which the organisms can undertake within a particular setting
(Chemero, 2003). For example, a ledge approximately 6 inches
high in a public area may function as an edge marker for adults;
however, for a young child it can function as a place to sit, as
a structure to climb on and to leap over, and as a challenging
edge on which to walk (Heft, 2010). The geographic scale of
place in this context refers to one’s immediately perceivable
environment. Three core principles underpin Gibson’s ecological
approach (Chemero, 2003): (1) perception is direct in that it
does not involve computational or mental representations; (2)
direct perception–action processes are primarily for the guidance
of action; and (3) because perception does not involve mental
computational or mental representations yet it can still guide
behavior, all the information and meaning necessary to guide
adaptive behavior must be available in the environment to be
perceived (Chemero, 2009).
We now articulate and engage a new branch of place enquiry
that engages with the fast as “place as a perception–action
process” ( Figure 1 ), resulting in the formation of immediately
perceived place meanings. This branch takes a bottom-up view
of information processing whereby it is assumed that the world
provides suﬃcient contextual information for our visual systems
to directly perceive what is there without the need for lengthy
cognitive abstraction. It is based on a transactional worldview of
psychology, akin to embodied scientiﬁc realism, which supports
the inseparability of subject and object (Maturana and Varela,
1987; Lakoﬀ and Johnson, 1999). In other words, dynamic, multi-
level relationships are possible between elements of mind, body,
culture, and environment (Raymond et al., 2017).
In this conceptual paper, we highlight the potential
contributions of aﬀordance theory to sense of place scholarship.
We ﬁrst critically discuss a set of “blind spots” in sense of place
scholarship and suggest how aﬀordance theory may address
them. We then outline a set of future research directions for
reconceptualizing sense of place theory to take account of fast and
slow processes of cognition associated with perception–action
and social construction, respectively.
KEY BLIND SPOTS IN SENSE OF PLACE
SCHOLARSHIP
Sense of Place Scholarship Rarely
Accounts for Sensory or Immediately
Perceived Meanings
Sense of place scholars have largely focused their investigations
on the social construction of place attachment or place meaning
using interpretative or top-down information processing
approaches ( Table 1). Each approach has a diﬀerent emphasis
on place. Brieﬂy, at the risk of over-simpliﬁcation, interpretive
approaches within “place as a center of meaning” often focus on
the meanings that shape actions or everyday experiences
(Wagenaar, 2011). Within the diversity of interpretive
traditions, sense of place scholars usually employ hermeneutic,
discursive, dialogical, and/or phenomenological approaches. In
a hermeneutic approach, meaning is generated in the individual
subjective mind through the interpretation of texts. Landscape
legibility or being able to “read” the landscape is therefore
crucial to the formation of a sense of place (Drenthen, 2011).
In a discursive approach, place meanings are treated as a social
practice that cannot be understood outside of interactional,
cultural, and institutional contexts in which they emerge.
They are formed through everyday language use and social
practice and have important rhetorical relevance (Di Masso
et al., 2014). Dialogical approaches emphasize the central role
of actions and practices in producing place meaning (West,
2016). A phenomenological approach seeks to qualify the long-
term relationship between an individual and a place through
lived experience (Relph, 1976; Norberg-Schulz, 1980; Seamon,
2014). Emphasis is placed on subjective place experience, deep
emotional ties, and individually constructed place meaning
(Tuan, 1974, 1977; Relph, 1976). Meaning is not solely a
person–environment relation, but an intersubjective matter of
people–environment relations. It is the shared performance of
individuals (e.g., by inventing, constructing, and deconstructing
structures) that turn lived space into a special place (Graumann,
2002). Much of the early work on sense of place and place
attachment focused on this holistic approach (Stedman, 2002).
In contrast, in “place as a locus of attachment” scholars
have frequently employed a top-down information processing
approach in order to quantify the relationships between activities,
physical attributes, and meanings (Moore, 2014). How top-down
information processing is used can vary across diﬀerent
levels of processing. In cognitive psychology, three levels of
information processing are commonly discussed: computational,
algorithmic–representational, and implementational (Marr,
1982; Newell, 1990). Computational level addresses questions
such as what is the goal of computation? What problems does
the system solve or overcome (Marr, 1982)? Here, we need to
consider what drives diﬀerent attitudes or beliefs about place.
In contrast, algorithmic–representational approaches describe
how the system represents the problem and what processes are
employed to manipulate inputs and outputs (David et al., 2004).
Most quantitative research on place attachment has focused
on this level of computation. For example, researchers have
attempted to psychometrically distinguish between functional
goals using the dimension of place dependence and symbolic
meanings using the dimension of place identity (Kyle et al., 2004;
Hammitt et al., 2006; Raymond et al., 2010; Ramkissoon et al.,
2013a; Brown et al., 2015). Psychometric scales that measure
these two dimensions of place attachment have been widely used
in environmental psychology (Lewicka, 2011), and have been
extended to measure the bonds developed between an individual
and broader elements of the social and biophysical context to
place (Kyle et al., 2005; Jorgensen and Stedman, 2006; Raymond
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1674
fpsyg-08-01674 September 27, 2017 Time: 16:55 # 5
Raymond et al. Sense of Place Blind Spots
et al., 2010; Ramkissoon et al., 2013b). Implementation-level
theory answers the question of how representations and
algorithms can be realized physically in the human brain (David
et al., 2004). For example, what happens in the human brain
when one becomes attached to a given place? No studies have
as yet employed neuroscience approaches to the assessment of
sense of place.
These diﬀerences notwithstanding, common to all these
approaches to sense of place is that they rely on a high
level of intellectual abstraction of cognitions, beliefs, attitudes,
or other mental representations about the physical, social,
or personal qualities of a setting and comparatively neglect
the role of the local context in direct perception (Vanclay
et al., 2008). We also see this intellectual abstraction in
studies that question the relative contribution of physical,
social, or personal dimensions of place (e.g., Beckley et al.,
2007). For example, Williams (2014b) discusses four layers
of place meaning: inherent, instrumental, socio-cultural, and
identity–expressive (Figure 1). Places can have inherent meaning
(Lynch, 1960) which transcends any culture, and reﬂects essential
properties of a place that many people perceive. Places can
have instrumental meanings associated with their material
properties that contribute to desired social or economic goals.
They can have socio-cultural meaning which recognizes that
places can be socially or symbolically constructed within the
cultural, historical, and geographical contexts of day-to-day
life (Hay, 1998; Gustafson, 2001; Seamon, 2014). The identity-
expressive layer focuses on how individuals become attracted
to and attached to place because those places possess intangible
emotional, symbolic, and spiritual meaning.
Despite the above, it remains unclear how the immediately
perceived and sensory dimensions of sight, smell, hearing, taste,
and touch (i.e., aspects of sensory experience) contribute to
overall place meaning. Crucially, these perceived meanings do
not involve mental computational or mental representations.
Rather, they involve a bottom-up theory of perception whereby
perception starts at the sensory input, the stimulus (Bernstein,
2010). Sense of place scholarship has been largely silent on this
question with general assumptions made that aspects of the
senses represent a particular category of place meaning (Russ
et al., 2015). Others imply that sensory experience reﬂects an
intensity of place meaning. For example, Hay (1998) showed
that as the amount of time spent in a place increases, the
relationship to the place, and in particular the attachment,
intensiﬁes and becomes deeper (from “aesthetic experience” to
“part of place”). A wider view of the literature suggests that
senses themselves are an important element of place perception.
Vanclay et al. (2008) suggest that full experience of a place can
only be experienced through the senses (smell, taste, feel, sight,
and spiritual dimensions), whether we are aware of them or not,
and call for the consideration of both intellectual abstraction and
sensory perception. They highlight the importance of diﬀerent
senses to people with disabilities, as in the case of the history
of “deaf places of silence” which are commonly known to
deaf people (Gulliver, 2008). In the marketing and branding
literatures, scholars have found that aesthetics and visual cues are
powerful ways of tailoring products to the perceived desires of
consumers (e.g., Porter, 2013). Other work considers the way in
which non-visual senses can, or could, play in the way places are
branded (Medway, 2015; Medway et al., 2016).
The complex relations among sensory, inherent, instrumental,
socio-cultural, and identity-expressive meanings have not been
adequately engaged in the sense of place literature. A holistic
assessment would require scholars to accept that sense of place
can form through both immediate and direct perception–action
processes in addition to the longer-term processes of intellectual
abstraction, representation, or computation, which are better
represented in the sense of place literature (mainly in terms of
social construction). Doing so will require a general willingness
to explore sense of place across time, including a consideration
of how sense of place forms and changes in response to
both immediate perceptions and longer-term processes of social
construction.
Sense of Place Scholarship Pays Little
Attention to How Place Meanings Are the
Joint Product of Attributes of
Environmental Features and the
Attributes of the Individual
Many of the debates in sense of place scholarship focus on
the relative contribution of social relationships and physical
environments to place attachment and place meanings. In
psychology, place has been presented as a socio-physical
construct comprising of physical, social, and personal/individual
components. However, few papers discuss the potential for sense
of place to be simultaneously determined by the intersection
of attributes of the environmental feature in question and
attributes of the particularindividual. In a review of the literature,
Lewicka (2011) found that physical factors have been found to
be stronger predictors of place attachment among higher income
respondents, whereas social ties are more important among lower
income respondents. Scannell and Giﬀord (2010) found that
physical factors were more important reasons for attachment to
the city whereas social factors were more important to the home
and region. Place meanings can also be inﬂuenced by a range
of ecological characteristics (Russ et al., 2015) and features of
the biophysical environment (Stedman, 2003), whereas others
involve pivotal moments or other signiﬁcant life experiences that
happened in a place (Manzo, 2005).
The focus on the relative contribution of diﬀerent dimensions
of place meaning implies a duality between individuals,
culture, and the environment in human–nature relationship
assessments and stiﬂes discussion on a more holistic concept
of “relatedness.” Absent in most discussions is the way in
which sense of place is formed based on the nature of the
setting, the kind/amount of experience with that setting, and
socio-demographic characteristics of the individual (Stedman,
2003). The concept of “situated cognition” is one way to
understand such relatedness of the conjoining of people and
place. By situated cognition we refer to how meaningful actions
are spatially and temporally located (i.e., situated) (Chemero,
2009) alongside socially and culturally constructed meaning
(Lave and Wenger, 1991; Wenger, 1998). For example, how
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1674
fpsyg-08-01674 September 27, 2017 Time: 16:55 # 6
Raymond et al. Sense of Place Blind Spots
decisions concerning the speed at which you ride your bike are
shaped by your characteristics as an individual (e.g., are you in
good physical condition, and are you generally risk averse or
risk seeking), the visual perception of a bike trail on a given day
(e.g., has it rained and are there muddy spots where you might
fall), your previous experiences on that bike trail tied to deeply
held place meanings and the social expectations of signiﬁcant
others accrued over time (Raymond et al., 2017). Such dynamic
relations imply an inseparability of subject and object (Maturana
and Varela, 1987; Lakoﬀ and Johnson, 1999), which sense of
place scholarship – at least as currently articulated – cannot
clearly explain or describe. Gustafson (2001) has provided one of
the most pivotal accounts of the potential for dynamic relations
among person, physical environment, and social environment.
He found evidence for a network of relational place meanings
with some meanings situated in the relationship between self,
others, and/or the environment. However, even this work has not
seriously engaged the kind of situated cognition we envision.
Sense of Place Scholarship Implicitly
Assumes That the Relationship between
Place Attachment and Behavior Is Linear
and Not Constituted in Dynamic
Relations Among Mind, Culture, and
Environment
Scholars have often assumed that sense of place is analytically
separable from behavior and therefore it can be used to
systematically predict it. For example, results showing that place
attachment directly predicts self-reported pro-environmental
behavior (Vaske and Kobrin, 2001; Stedman, 2002; Brehm et al.,
2013) or place attachment indirectly predicts behavior through
values, beliefs, and norms (Raymond et al., 2011). In most
instances, the eﬀect sizes of these linear models are only modest
(<20%), raising questions about how to model the relationships
between sense of place and action, and what the other “missing”
predictors of behavior might be. These models also tend to
test the relationships between place attachment and behavior
at a point in time rather than how these dynamics may vary
across time. Rather than a new model, perhaps we require a
new set of assumptions about the links between sense of place
and behavior. The above assumptions about the relationships
between sense of place and behavior change if we engage an
alternative worldview of “transactionalism, ” which emphasizes
the inseparability of subject and object (Maturana and Varela,
1987; Lakoﬀ and Johnson, 1999). Here, dynamic, multi-level
relationships are possible between elements of the mind,
environmental and cultural system, which imply that one cannot
understand aspects of behavior without also understanding
aspects of the intertwined socio-cultural system. There is growing
evidence for this worldview in human–environment relationship
studies, but not in sense of place research per se . Cooke et al.
(2016) eloquently show that human–environment connections
are not produced solely within the mind, but through relations
between mind, body, and environment over time. Fischer and
Eastwood (2016) ﬁnd intersections between the co-production
of ecosystem structures, ecosystem services, and the social
construction of these structures and services. Brown (2016)
demonstrates how the experience of textured terrain (e.g., the
resistance, gradient, shape lumpiness, and irregularities of the
terrain) can produce sensory and emotional experiences that
motivate regular exercise.
Sense of Place Scholarship Does Not
Account for How Both Place Meanings
and Place Attachment Vary Across the
Life Course
The sense of place literature typically engages experience and
time over a longer time horizon. It is generally accepted across all
approaches that place attachment slowly changes in intensity with
one’s length of residence in a given place (Hammitt et al., 2004;
Brown and Raymond, 2007), and is shaped by economic, social,
political, and other external disruptions to a place (Brown and
Perkins, 1992; Feldman, 1996; Devine-Wright, 2009). Research
has also considered how place attachment develops across long-
term residents, with sequential stages in the development found
across time in a given place [Hay, 1998; but see Stedman (2006)
for a dissenting view; Rowles, 1983], and the role of nostalgia
in facilitating attachments to place (Lewicka, 2011). Scholars
have used identity theories to describe how physical changes
(both actual and proposed changes) to place may threaten
place-based identities (Proshansky et al., 1983; Stedman et al.,
2002; Devine-Wright, 2009); and how place attachment may be
both threatened and/or enhanced across place change (Devine-
Wright and Howes, 2010). Place attachment can also vary across
life-place trajectories of: long-term residence in a single place,
return to the home place, residential mobility with continuity in
settlement, residential mobility with discontinuity in settlement,
and high residential mobility (Bailey et al., 2016).
Despite the above, the role of place experience in shaping
place meanings and attachments across the life course has
not been thoroughly considered. Scholars have made a general
assumption that place meanings are sustained by regular
environmental actions and routines, that are in turn maintained
and strengthened across one’s depth of experience with
place (Seamon, 1979; Fullilove, 2004). For example, from a
phenomenological perspective, place meanings are embedded in
stories and metaphors, each highly dependent on context, and
embedded or contained within an evolving set of experiences
(Patterson, 1998). But how may these meanings change across
place experiences at diﬀerent life stages, and what role do these
changing meanings have on one’s overall place attachment? Sense
of place scholarship cannot fully answer such questions. They
are important to consider because wider psychology research has
shown that the connections that we have with family and friends
and the experiences we have in place during important transition
times in life (e.g., children approaching decisions to leave home)
are related to mobility preferences (Elder et al., 1996). Studying
these relationships may help us better understand and predict
the determinants of mobility and migration, which is a mega-
trend of the 21st century and also addresses a major gap in
sense of place theory concerning the interrelationships between
place meaning and place attachment. Current discussions often
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1674
fpsyg-08-01674 September 27, 2017 Time: 16:55 # 7
Raymond et al. Sense of Place Blind Spots
become confounded by conﬂicting views about the relative merits
of qualitative vs. quantitative studies implemented over short
time spans as opposed to understanding how they together may
inform sense of place over diﬀerent life stages.
HOW AFFORDANCE THEORY CAN
ADDRESS BLIND SPOTS IN SENSE OF
PLACE SCHOLARSHIP
Affordance Theory Demonstrates How
Direct Perception and Actualization
Inform Place Meanings
Two processes underpin the theory of aﬀordances, namely direct
perception and actualization (Kyttä, 2002, 2004). In contrast
to most sense of place scholarship, an individual does not
require mental computation or representations because the
perception of meaningful behaviors is readily available in the
environment, hence direct. An individual directly perceives
what are his/her opportunities for action in an environment
given the relations among the observer’s knowledge, intentions,
action abilities (constrained by body morphology, physiology,
and emotional/intellectual development), and the properties
of the environment itself (Canal-Bruland and van der Kamp,
2015). Perception is directly functional for the guidance of
action rather than for gathering information (Chemero, 2009,
p. 18). Actualization is then the processes of complementing
environmental opportunities with personal abilities. In other
words, the environment provides something that the individual
perceives as oﬀering the potential for activity, but actualization of
the activity only emerges when the diﬀerent characteristics of the
individual, such as his or her physical abilities, social needs, and
personal intentions, are matched in meaningful relations with the
environmental features (Kyttä, 2004).
These relations mean that aﬀordances can rapidly change
from potential to perceived, used or shaped depending on the
relationships between the individual, culture, and setting (Kyttä,
2003). Kyttä (2002) describes this dynamic. All environments
have countless numbers of potential aﬀordances that no agent
has yet perceived. The array of potential aﬀordances available
to any given individual is deﬁned by the individual’s qualities
such as the children’s physical skills or bodily proportions. The
qualities of the individual as well as his or her current intentions
and other cultural factors determine which aﬀordances out of
all potential aﬀordances the individual perceives in diﬀerent
situations (i.e., perceived aﬀordances). Some of these aﬀordances
are used in the here and now. Individual and socio-cultural
factors can have an inﬂuence on what aﬀordances are utilized
and when this occurs. It is also possible to actively shape the
environment to create new aﬀordances, or to change existing
ones, in what is referred to as shaped aﬀordances. Modifying the
physical environment can open space for the identiﬁcation of new
aﬀordances and new possible activities (Kyttä, 2002, 2004).
Hence, through direct perception and action we create various
forms of perceived place meanings related to functional, social,
or symbolic elements of a given area. Meanings are assigned
to places within one’s immediately perceivable environment.
These places have clear material and perceptual components.
Hereafter, we refer to them as “immediately perceived place
meanings” to distinguish them from the more commonly known
place meanings formed through social construction.
Affordance Theory Demonstrates That
Cognitions Are Situated in Relation to
the Environment, the Individual, and
One’s Socio-Cultural Context
In aﬀordance theory, perception–action process and associated
cognitions always occur in a situation. Because perception is
direct, meaningful actions are always spatially and temporally
located (i.e., situated), providing information about “here, ”
“there, ” “me, ” and “now” (Chemero, 2009). Information
perceivable in any given situation will specify patterns of
relations between the organism and the environment (Shapiro,
2011). Situations can then have motivating qualities: as in the case
of a low ledge for children (as a “climbing place”), or repelling like
an aggressive dog (Heft, 2010) suggesting an aﬀective dimension
to aﬀordances (Kyttä, 2003; Roe and Aspinall, 2011; Withagen
et al., 2012). Thus, patterns at any given situation not only oﬀer
the opportunity to act, but also can invite and attract the action
(Withagen et al., 2012) or repel and detract the action. Any
given place can therefore have an array of positive and negative
aﬀordances that promote or inhibit action, respectively.
These perceptions and actions are not only situated with
reference to a physical context (Heft, 2013). Associations between
bodily experiences and abstract concepts are situated in a socio-
cultural context, informed by cultural imperatives, values, and
habits (Gibson, 1979; Varela et al., 1991; Leung et al., 2011), and
social learning (Bandura, 1977), which can be readily applied
to gaining competence in place. Individual and sociocultural
factors together determine which of the perceived aﬀordances
become used aﬀordances within a given experience (e.g., sat on,
swam in, climbed on), as in the case of socialization during
childhood development. During development, a child learns to
perceive not only the aﬀordances for the self, but also how those
same objects furnish similar aﬀordances to another (Gibson,
1979). Parents or signiﬁcant others can introduce children to
the conventional meaning of an object by manipulating which
objects command attention and demonstrating how to use the
object through performing its central function. For example, in
a study of a kindergarten in central Norway, some 3–5-year
olds needed to be socially invited into physical play, to realize
the potential aﬀordances for physical activity (Bjørgen, 2016).
Encouraging invitations from others, responses, imitations, and
sharing moment of fun were of signiﬁcance in the involvement
and duration level of physical activity. Hence, the physical
activity is not always created by the children, but requires
invitations from others in the environment where they are
playing and regulation by signiﬁcant others who promote certain
behaviors.
In summary, this section highlights that immediately
perceived place meanings are both temporally and physically
located and are inﬂuenced by a range of physical and social
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1674
fpsyg-08-01674 September 27, 2017 Time: 16:55 # 8
Raymond et al. Sense of Place Blind Spots
elements in one’s immediately perceivable environment and by
socio-cultural processes.
Affordance Theory Suggests That Bodily
Action Is Constituted within Dynamic
Relations among Mind, Body, Culture,
and the Environment
Aﬀordance theory suggests that cognition is not an activity
of the mind alone, but is instead distributed across the
entire relationship situation, including mind, body, culture, and
physical environment (Heft, 1989). Through direct perception–
action processes an individual actualizes those relations among
environment, culture, body, and mind that reﬂect and support his
or her capabilities and intended actions at any moment in time
(Kyttä, 2002). How they are actualized depends on the real-time
relationship between a mental system in a body with particular
capabilities with an environment that oﬀers opportunities for
acting on those services. Hence, bodily action is constituted
within dynamic relations.
The coupling of perception and action in the social aﬀordance
literature is one example of these dynamic relations. It has been
found that eye gaze patterns inﬂuence postural coordination,
and gaze co-ordination is related to mutual understanding
[see Shockley et al. (2009) for a review]. For example, pairs of
individuals who are asked to perform a rhythmic task such as
rocking in a chair rock independently in their chairs are pulled to
spontaneously synchronize their movements (Richardson et al.,
2005, 2007). The patterns of behavior that occur between the
two individuals rocking independently in separate chairs with no
mechanical (only informational) links obey the same dynamics as
coupled components (Marsh et al., 2009). Studies have also shown
coupling across a range of other behaviors including walking,
running, and plank lifting (Anderson et al., 2012).
It is important to note that these perception–action processes
are not static, but since they are related to activities, they happen
over time and their actualization changes the subsequent patterns
of relations between individual and environment (Chemero,
2009). In other words, an individual’s perception–action in the
environment inﬂuences both surrounding (e.g., by manipulating
objects, aﬀecting others, moving) and abilities (e.g., by learning,
acquiring new skills), and in doing so opens up possibilities for
new activities and thus novel or reshaped patterns of aﬀordances
(Shotter, 1983; Heft, 1996). Raymond et al. (2017) provide
the example of a mountain bike rider to show a dynamic
relation among the condition of the rider, perception of the
environment, and riding speed (behavior). They note that the
act of riding improves individual body condition and conﬁdence,
which in-turn has an eﬀect on what kind of environment
can be perceived as safe and enjoyable. Skills are embodied
by repeatedly practicing mountain-biking allowing a rider to
perceive a rocky and wet slope as safe and enjoyable, thereby
enabling the rider to approach it and enjoy it at faster riding
speed.
In summary, this section highlights that elements of
our own mind and bodily condition inform what types of
meanings we immediately perceive in a given place. Human
have the ability to learn new skills and to improve their
physical condition which opens the potential for new forms
of immediately perceived place meanings. We also change
a place through our actions, which opens spaces for new
meanings.
DISCUSSION
The objective of this paper was to highlight the potential
contributions of aﬀordance theory to sense of place scholarship.
We asserted that most sense of place scholarship is preoccupied
with the “slow” in that most research suggests that place
meanings as slow to evolve, sometimes not matching material
or social reality (lag eﬀects), and thus as tending to inhibit
change. Little attention is paid to the role of sensory or
immediately perceived meanings in the formation of sense of
place; how place meanings are the joint product of attributes
of environmental features and the attributes of the individual
(i.e., the importance of situated cognition); the non-linear
dynamics between sense of place and behavior, including the
dynamic relations among mind, culture, and environment; and
how place meanings vary across the life course. In contrast,
aﬀordance theory engages the “fast” – the more immediate
perception–action processes between an individual and their
social and cultural environment. Aﬀordance theory demonstrates
how direct perception and actualization inform immediately
perceived place meanings that cognitions are situated in relation
to the environment, the individual, and one’s socio-cultural
context, and behavior is constituted within (and simultaneously
determined by) dynamic relations among mind, body, culture,
and the environment.
How do these diﬀerent views on human–environment
relationships inﬂuence our approach to sense of place
research? Rather than viewing sense of place as exclusively
(or even primarily) a social construction or representation,
we suggest it could be seen as a property of the relationship
between perception–action and social construction processes
both within and across place-based experiences . Along these
lines, we encourage sense of place researchers to assess the
relationships among immediately perceived place meanings
and other forms of place meaning that are socially constructed
through longer-term processes of cognition and how each
may contribute – independently, and collectively – to one’s
place attachment. To understand these relationships, we
encourage place scholars to move away from a focus on concept
development and measurement, based ﬁrmly in the social
construction approach, to enquiries of place as a multi-channel
process which provides for an understanding of the relational
dynamics between perception–action processes and socially
constructed processes. Integrating the perceptual and conceptual
domains will require place scholars to engage with the theory
of embodied cognition, dynamic systems, as well as multiple
views of cognition and behavior. In the next section, we propose
pathways through which to consider the potential relationships
between these two understandings of human–environment
relationships.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1674
fpsyg-08-01674 September 27, 2017 Time: 16:55 # 9
Raymond et al. Sense of Place Blind Spots
Embracing the “Fast” and “Slow” in
Future Sense of Place Research
Future research could investigate how the qualities of both sense
of place scholarship and aﬀordance theory could be applied
to solve important issues in sense of place scholarship, such
as how place attachment may form and change in a given
place. The dual-process theory of higher cognition could be
a fertile ground through which to explore or examine the
intersections between place meanings formed through socially
constructed process and meanings formed through aﬀordances,
i.e., perception–action process. According to this theory, both
slow and fast forms of cognition exist (Kahneman, 2003; Evans,
2010; Evans and Stanovich, 2013). Type 1 cognition is grounded
in perception and intuition – thinking is fast, automatic,
eﬀortless, and associative, while Type 2 which is grounded in
reasoning – thinking is slow, serial, controlled, eﬀortful, and
rule-governed. Type 1 generates impressions of the attributes
of objects of perception and thought. In contrast, Type 2 is
involved in judgments, irrespective of whether they originate
in impressions or in deliberative reasoning (Kahneman, 2003).
While there have been a number of criticisms of dual-process
theories (see overview in Evans and Stanovich, 2013), there
is general acceptance that Type 1 represents a set of modes
of cognition associated with rapid autonomous processes that
yield habitual responses unless they are intervened on by higher
order reasoning processes of Type 2 (Evans and Stanovich,
2013). Within each type there are modes of cognitive processing
styles or thinking dispositions (Stanovich, 2009) which can vary
continuously according to personality characteristics and cultural
factors (Evans and Stanovich, 2013).
Following this view, is it possible that direct perception–
action processes operate as a subset of Type 1, fast, automatic
processes (following Herschbach, 2015)? In contrast, can socially
constructed process be considered a subset of Type 2, slow
processes? Three research areas worth considering under this line
of thought are:
Research Direction 1 – Investigate How Sense of
Place Is Both Directly Perceived (T ype 1) and Socially
Constructed in a Given Place (T ype 2)
Perceived meanings, as we have described above, may play a
bigger role in “sense of place” than we typically think. We propose
that in any experience in life, sense of place can be associated
with immediately perceived place meanings (related to Type 1
cognition) and/or place meanings formed through longer-term
processes of social construction (related to Type 2 cognition). For
example, the ﬁreplace a couple sits next to after getting married
enables the used aﬀordance of warmth and light, plus a cozy
atmosphere. Equally, that ﬁreplace can be related to a diverse set
of inherent, instrumental, socio-cultural, and identity–expressive
meanings (Williams, 2014b), which can be positive and negative
in nature (Manzo, 2005). At the time of the wedding they may be
related to feelings of romance and love, but if the ﬁreplace was
the backdrop for the scene of agreement to divorce it could also
be associated with feelings of grief and loss, or if during a winter
power outage, simply a pragmatic source of warmth or cooking.
It follows from above that direct perceptions can be repeated in
behavior.
We also propose that the relationships between direct
perceptions and social construction are unlikely to be direct and
linear. At small geographic scales, we hypothesize that place
attachment will be a property of both immediately perceived and
socially constructed place meanings, and that these meanings
collectively help guide behavior. To investigate this hypothesis, a
fruitful area of enquiry may be to specify physical characteristics
of the environment that are perceived positively for a certain
set of aﬀordances and are known (at least anecdotally) to be
a source of place attachment. Starting with a set of known
relationships would help researchers to identify the mechanisms
through which Type 1 and Type 2 processes occur.
Understanding the duration of focus of direct perception
and social construction is also crucial to this line of enquiry.
It is assumed that direct perception is immediate and social
construction takes longer, but what are the actual time
diﬀerences? Quasi-experiments may play an important role in
understanding the time diﬀerences in cognitions resulting from
direct perception and social construction so as to form a more
holistic understanding of place.
To date we have avoided the question of how diﬀerent types of
place meanings inform each other at diﬀerent geographic scales.
To understand how sense of place is both perceived and socially
constructed, we need to clarify the spatial scale of “place” and thus
to what extent an aﬀordance is a “place.” Here, we argued that
there are parallels between aﬀordances and sense of place when
focusing on one’s immediate perceivable environment, such as
a room, home, street, or small urban park (i.e., ﬁne geographic
scales). Yet how do direct perception and social construction
occur at coarser geographic scales such as a neighborhood, city, or
region? In short, we don’t yet know. An important future research
direction is to examine whether aﬀordances can be nested or
sequenced in ways that enable us to understand direct perception
at larger spatial scales. Such research would need to challenge
some of the fundamental assumptions of aﬀordance theory
concerning how humans directly perceive the environment. For
example, researchers would need to consider the potential for a
collection of aﬀordances in a place, a network of places in the
neighborhood, a set of familiar and unfamiliar neighborhoods
in a metropolitan area, etc. We consider this question of the
scalability of aﬀordance-based thinking an exciting area of future
inquiry.
Research Direction 2 – Explore and Examine Whether
Perceived (T ype 1) and Socially Constructed (T ype 2)
Dimensions of Place Relate to One Another When
Perceived Meanings Become Unsituated
The previous research direction investigates whether place as a
perception–action process and place as a socially constructed
process exist concurrently in a given place. But how do they
relate? We propose that perceived and socially constructed
meanings relate when perceived meanings become unsituated.
This may occur through the process of “oﬄine cognition.”
According to Wilson (2002), humans build up in long-term
memory a set of reactions, movements, sensations, perceptions,
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1674
fpsyg-08-01674 September 27, 2017 Time: 16:55 # 10
Raymond et al. Sense of Place Blind Spots
feelings which are available for various purposes including
cultural ones. In this process, mental structures that originally
evolved for perception or action are co-opted and run “oﬀ-line, ”
to assist in thinking and knowing (Glenberg, 1997; Wilson, 2002).
Just thinking about an object produces states as if the object
were actually there, as does perceiving a symbol, such as the
name of the person or object (Spackman and Y anchar, 2014).
Cognition can therefore become “unsituated.” The evidence for
oﬄine cognition is widespread. It is included in discussions
of mental imagery (including visual, audio, and kinesthetic
imagery), working memory, episodic memory, implicit memory,
and reasoning and problem-solving [see Wilson (2002) for a
review].
No empirical work has tested the potential relationships
between perceived and socially constructed meanings using ideas
of oﬄine cognition, but we can describe it from a practical
perspective at ﬁne geographic scales such as a room. Imagine a
room in our home that we have been living in for a long time.
We enter and exit that room multiple times on a daily basis
and our action is guided by a range of perceptions concerning
the size, light, and warmth of that room. Now imagine that
we get married in that room. Through processes of social
construction, that room is now associated with a range of socio-
cultural meanings like love and social connection, and inherent
meanings like the ambience of the room on the wedding day.
Through processes of oﬄine cognition, these perceived meanings
associated with the sights, smells, and sounds of the wedding day
become engrained in memory and in language, which provides
the pathway through which perceived and socially constructed
meanings relate.
We propose that perceived and socially constructed meanings
are most likely to conjoin when memories are activated. In
future studies, researchers could draw on phenomenological
approaches in order to investigate the relationships between
diﬀerent components of living memory. That is, how diﬀerent
types of aﬀordances are contained within (or independent to)
inherent, instrumental, socio-cultural, and identity–expressive
meanings within a given place and/or across places. Also,
researchers could identify which types of aﬀordances become
“lost in space, ” i.e., are rarely associated with diﬀerent types of
socially constructed meanings, but rather are part of our everyday
navigation through life.
Research Direction 3 – Explore How Place
Attachment Changes Over Different Stages of the
Life Course Based upon Dynamic Relationships
between Processes of Social Construction and
Perception–Action
While research has considered how place attachment varies with
respect to length of residence, place disruption, or nostalgia, no
studies have considered how the structure of place attachment
may change with reference to diﬀerent forms of place experiences
and place meanings across the life course. By bringing together
the qualities of sense of place and aﬀordance theories, we
propose that place attachment could be considered as an emergent
property of the dynamic sets of meanings associated experiences
across the life course . By this we mean that types of perceived
and socially constructed meanings formed during experiences
at an early life stage (e.g., during a 6th birthday) are likely
to inform the perceived and socially constructed meanings
during experiences at a later life stage (e.g., getting married),
assuming those experiences occur in the same place. The
integration of the aﬀordance perspective and how it relates –
for example – to the changes in physical capacities associated
with aging (e.g., the ledge we referred to earlier may be a
challenging climbing place to a child, but too easy for the
adult, and beyond the capacity of the elderly) may prove a
very useful framework for understanding changes in attachment
through the life course (e.g., Cuba and Hummon, 1993) or
among the elderly in particular (Rubinstein and Parmelee,
1992).
We don’t know how these immediately perceived and socially
constructed place meanings combine within and across time to
inform changes in the intensity or structure of place attachment.
To establish this process, we require new mechanisms for not
only examining how place as a perception–action process and
socially constructed process relate at any given point in time (i.e.,
research area 2), but also how they may relate across signiﬁcant
experiences in a given place. Longitudinal research is needed to
establish whether and how the memories associated with given
aﬀordances earlier in life inform later experiences in the same
place.
Certain elements of early place experiences could also
be transferrable to new settings, requiring an improved
understanding of how perception–action processes and socially
constructed meanings relate across time and diﬀerent places .
Longitudinal research is also needed to understand how the
aﬀordances perceived in one place early in life are held in
memories to inform the aﬀordances and social constructions of
other places later in life.
Understanding place attachment as an emergent property
of a complex system also has major implications for the
assessment of the relationships between place attachment
and pro-environmental behavior. If place attachment is an
emergent property of both perception–action and socially
constructed processes which are changing across one’s time in
place then such phenomena cannot be fully understood using
traditional linear cause and eﬀect models, as often applied
in place research when understanding place as a locus of
attachment. Rather, we encourage a new approach to the
assessment of pro-environmental behavior which is based on
non-linear, complex dynamics. Such dynamics are already the
source of intense investigation through areas such as social
learning (Cheng and Mattor, 2010), complexity science, and
sustainability transitions (Andersson, 2014) and co-production
of knowledge (Armitage et al., 2011; Tengö et al., 2014; Reyers
et al., 2015), and initial thinking has occurred in the sense
of place realm as well (Stedman, 2016; Masterson et al.,
2017). We urge a more spatial and relational view of these
dynamics recognizing how individual minds and bodies and
constituted within places that are both perceived and socially
constructed, and how both direct perception and abstractions
can lead to formation and change in behavior across places and
time.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 10 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1674
fpsyg-08-01674 September 27, 2017 Time: 16:55 # 11
Raymond et al. Sense of Place Blind Spots
Implications of Fast and Slow Processes
for the Design and Management of
Urban Landscapes
If urban settings are repositories for a range of socially
constructed and perceived meanings (Research Direction 1)
then these settings need to be designed with both fast and
slow cognitive processes in mind and thus multiple layers of
place meaning. By layers we mean planning, designing, and
implementing new forms of architecture in urban landscapes
that cater for clusters of diﬀerent types of immediately perceived
and socially constructed place meanings, including functional,
aﬀective, and symbolic. These clusters could be tailored to
diﬀerent user groups so as to address important elements of
environmental justice (Raymond et al., 2016).
Stemming from Research Direction 2, it may be possible
for urban environments to be designed with aﬀordances that
immediately evoke diﬀerent forms of place meanings. Such
urban designs may have multiple important uses for highly
mobile individuals or migrants seeking to integrate into new
communities rapidly. Certain types of aﬀordances could be
created in urban environments to bridge place meanings between
their place of origin and their new (sometimes temporary) place
of residence. For example, by creating “open spaces” which enable
new migrants to shape and reshape aﬀordances in that setting
through art, craft, and music, informed by place meanings and
memories from their place of origin. However, we acknowledge
that designing urban environments for a diversity of meanings
can lead to the potential for conﬂicts between diﬀerent interest
groups, which also needs to be managed (Stedman, 1999).
Accepting place attachment as an emergent property
(Research Direction 3) requires urban planners to take account
of both short-term and long-term processes of cognition
when designing cities. For example, forecasting how citizens’
experiences in a given setting could inform future experiences
(and associated immediately perceived and socially constructed
meanings), as opposed to designing solely for immediate,
functional uses. This strategy would also suggest that city
planners recognize that the end goal may not be to “increase
place attachment” per se , but rather create settings that cater
for a diversity of experiences and place meanings, each
informing diverse (and sometimes oscillating) trajectories of
place attachment across time. It also requires planners to
recognize that initiatives for encouraging “sense of place” among
diﬀerent ethnic and migrant groups may achieve fast results in
some areas (e.g., providing a playground so that children have
the opportunity to play in their local environment), but have
slow results in other areas (e.g., building the social capital so that
individuals feel they belong in that place).
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we urged a systematic consideration of how
both slow and fast processes of cognition inform sense of
place scholarship. We asserted that sense of place scholarship
has been conservative, non-dynamic, and principally focused
on aspects of place meaning that unfold over time through a
process of social construction. Theory development has largely
excluded the role of immediate sensory and direct perception–
action processes in meaning making, otherwise referred to
as immediately perceived place meanings, but instead focused
on place meanings formed through longer-term processes of
social construction. In response, we suggest how aﬀordance
theory could overcome a number of blind spots in sense
of place scholarship and then suggest research directions for
empirically justifying how place as perception–action processes
(a subset of Type 1 thinking in the dual-process model) and
place as socially constructed processes (a subset of Type 2
thinking) relate to each other across place experiences and
time. Reconceptualizing sense of place as fast and slow presents
opportunities to consider how immediate perceptual processes
can contribute to longer-term processes of social construction
and vice versa. It also paves the way to addressing one of
the most contentious aspects of sense of place scholarship
and wider psychology: how processes of intellectual abstraction
and computation based on interactionist worldviews can be
united with immediate sensory experience based on transactional
worldviews to better account for not only for place meanings and
place attachment, but also environmental behavior across the life
course.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
CR reviewed the literature and developed the key arguments for
the paper, also wrote most sections of the paper with additions
from MK and RS. MK provided insightful contributions
to the aﬀordance theory section of the paper, and to the
future directions and management implications sections. RS
provided insightful contributions regarding the argumentation
and framing of the paper, and also provided key theoretical
insights into sense of place, and the discussion section of the
paper.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This paper was funded by the PLAN-Health (PLANH) project
through the Academy of Finland. Project number: 13297753.
REFERENCES
Altman, I., and Rogoﬀ, B. (1987). “World views in psychology: trait, interactional,
organismic, and transactional perspectives, ” in Handbook of Environmental
Psychology, Vol. 1, eds D. Stokols and I. Altman (New York, NY: John Wiley
& Sons), 7–40.
Anderson, M. L., Richardson, M. J., and Chemero, A. (2012). Eroding the
boundaries of cognition: implications of embodiment(1). Top. Cogn. Sci. 4,
717–730. doi: 10.1111/j.1756-8765.2012.01211.x
Andersson, C. (2014). Complexity science and sustainability transitions.
Environ. Innov. Soc. Transit. 11, 50–53. doi: 10.1016/j.eist.2014.
03.001
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 11 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1674
fpsyg-08-01674 September 27, 2017 Time: 16:55 # 12
Raymond et al. Sense of Place Blind Spots
Armitage, D., Berkes, F., Dale, A., Kocho-Schellenberg, E., and Patton, E. (2011).
Co-management and the co-production of knowledge: learning to adapt in
Canada’s Arctic.Glob. Environ. Change 21, 995–1004. doi: 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.
2011.04.006
Bailey, E., Devine-Wright, P., and Batel, S. (2016). Using a narrative approach
to understand place attachments and responses to power line proposals:
the importance of life-place trajectories. J. Environ. Psychol. 48, 200–211.
doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2016.10.006
Bandura, A. (1977). Social Learning Theory. Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Bechtel, W. (2008). Mechanisms in cognitive psychology: what are the operations?
Philos. Sci. 75, 983–994. doi: 10.1086/594540
Beckley, T. M., Stedman, R. C., Wallace, S. M., and Ambard, M. (2007).
Snapshots of what matters most: using resident-employed photography to
articulate attachment to place. Soc. Nat. Resour. 20, 913–929. doi: 10.1080/
08941920701537007
Bernstein, D. A. (2010).Essentials of Psychology, 5th Edn. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth
Cengage Learning.
Bjørgen, K. (2016). Physical activity in light of aﬀordances in outdoor
environments: qualitative observation studies of 3-5 years olds in kindergarten.
Springerplus 5, 950. doi: 10.1186/s40064-016-2565-y
Brehm, J. M., Eisenhauer, B. W., and Stedman, R. C. (2013). Environmental
concern: examining the role of place meaning and place attachment. Soc. Nat.
Resour. 26, 522–538. doi: 10.1080/08941920.2012.715726
Brown, B., and Perkins, D. (1992). “Disruptions in place attachment, ” in Place
Attachment, eds I. Altman and S. M. Low (New York, NY: Plenum Press),
279–304. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4684-8753-4_13
Brown, G., and Raymond, C. (2007). The relationship between place attachment
and landscape values: toward mapping place attachment. Appl. Geogr. 27,
89–111. doi: 10.1016/j.apgeog.2006.11.002
Brown, G., Raymond, C. M., and Corcoran, J. (2015). Mapping and measuring
place attachment. Appl. Geogr. 57, 42–53. doi: 10.1016/j.apgeog.2014.
12.011
Brown, K. M. (2016). The haptic pleasures of ground-feel: the role of textured
terrain in motivating regular exercise. Health Place 46, 307–314. doi: 10.1016/j.
healthplace.2016.08.012
Bruner, J. (1990). Acts of Meaning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Canal-Bruland, R., and van der Kamp, J. (2015). Embodied perception: a
proposal to reconcile aﬀordance and spatial perception. Iperception 6, 63–66.
doi: 10.1068/i0709jc
Casey, E. S. (2009). Remembering: A Phenomenological Study , 2nd Edn.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Chemero, A. (2003). An outline of a theory of aﬀordances. Ecol. Psychol. 15,
181–195. doi: 10.1207/S15326969ECO1502_5
Chemero, A. (2009). Radical Embodied Cognitive Science . Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Cheng, A. S., and Mattor, K. M. (2010). Place-based planning as a platform
for social learning: insights from a national forest landscape assessment
process in Western Colorado. Soc. Nat. Resour. 23, 385–400. doi: 10.1080/
08941920802178198
Cooke, B., West, S., and Boonstra, W. J. (2016). Dwelling in the biosphere:
exploring an embodied human–environment connection in resilience thinking.
Sustain. Sci. 11, 831–843. doi: 10.1007/s11625-016-0367-3
Cuba, L., and Hummon, D. M. (1993). Constructing a sense of home: place
aﬃliation and migration across the life cycle. Sociol. Forum 8, 547–572.
doi: 10.1007/BF01115211
David, D., Miclea, M., and Opre, A. (2004). The information-processing approach
to the human mind: basics and beyond. J. Clin. Psychol. 60, 353–368.
doi: 10.1002/jclp.10250
Devine-Wright, P. (2009). Rethinking NIMBYism: the role of place attachment and
place identity in explaining place-protective action. J. Community Appl. Soc.
Psychol. 19, 426–441. doi: 10.1002/casp.1004
Devine-Wright, P., and Howes, Y. (2010). Disruption to place attachment and the
protection of restorative environments: a wind energy case study. J. Environ.
Psychol. 30, 271–280. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2010.01.008
Di Masso, A., Dixon, J., and Durrheim, K. (2014). “Place attachment as
discursive practice, ” in Place Attachment: Advances in Theory, Methods and
Applications, eds L. Manzo and P. D. Wright (New York, NY: Routledge),
75–86.
Drenthen, M. (2011). “Reading ourselves through the land: landscape
hermeneutics and ethics of place’ , ” in Placing Nature on the Borders of
Religion, Philosophy, and Ethics , eds F. Clingerman and M. Dixon (Farnham:
Ashgate), 123–138.
Elder, G. H., King, V., and Conger, R. D. (1996). Attachment to place and migration
prospects: a developmental perspective. J. Res. Adolesc. 6, 397–425.
Evans, J. S. B. T. (2010). Intuition and reasoning: a dual-process perspective.
Psychol. Inq. 21, 313–326. doi: 10.1080/1047840X.2010.521057
Evans, J. S., and Stanovich, K. E. (2013). Dual-process theories of higher
cognition: advancing the debate. Perspect. Psychol. Sci.8, 223–241. doi: 10.1177/
1745691612460685
Farnum, J., Hall, T., and Kruger, L. (2005). Sense of Place in Natural Resource
Recreation and Tourism: An Evaluation and Assessment of Research Findings .
Moscow, ID: University of Idaho. doi: 10.2737/PNW-GTR-660
Fay, B. (1996). Contemporary Philosophy of Social Science. Oxford: Blackwell.
Feldman, R. M. (1996). Constancy and change in attachments to types of
settlements. Environ. Behav. 28, 419–445. doi: 10.1177/0013916596284001
Fischer, A., and Eastwood, A. (2016). Coproduction of ecosystem services as
human–nature interactions—An analytical framework. Land Use Policy 52,
41–50. doi: 10.1016/j.landusepol.2015.12.004
Fullilove, M. (2004). Root Shock: How Tearing Up City Neighborhoods Hurts
America and What We Can Do About It. New York, NY: Ballantine Books.
Gibson, J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception . Boston, MA:
Houghton Miﬄin.
Giuliani, M. (2003). “Theory of attachment and place attachment, ” inPsychological
Theories for Environmental Issues , eds M. Bonnes, T. Lee, and M. Bonaiuto
(Aldershot: Ashgate), 137–170.
Glenberg, A. M. (1997). What memory is for. Behav. Brain Sci. 20, 1–19. doi:
10.1017/S0140525X97000010
Graumann, C. F. (2002). “The phenomenological approach to people–environment
studies, ” in Handbook of Environmental Psychology , eds R. Bechtel and A.
Churchman (New York, NY: Wiley), 95–113.
Gulliver, M. (2008). “Places of Silence, ” in Making Sense of Place , eds F. Vanclay,
M. Higgins, and A. Blackshaw (Canberra, ACT: National Museum of Australia
Press), 87–93.
Gustafson, P. (2001). Meanings of place: everyday experience and theoretical
conceptualisations. J. Environ. Psychol. 21, 5–16. doi: 10.1006/jevp.2000.0185
Hammitt, W. E., Backlund, E. A., and Bixler, R. D. (2004). Experience use history,
place bonding and resource substitution of trout anglers during recreation
engagements. J. Leis. Res. 36, 356–378.
Hammitt, W. E., Backlund, E. A., and Bixler, R. D. (2006). Place bonding for
recreation places: conceptual and empirical development. Leis. Stud. 25, 17–41.
doi: 10.1080/02614360500098100
Hay, R. (1998). Sense of place in developmental context. J. Environ. Psychol. 18,
5–29. doi: 10.1006/jevp.1997.0060
Heft, H. (1989). Aﬀordances and the body: an intentional analysis of Gibson’s
ecological approach to visual perception. J. Theory Soc. Behav. 19, 1–30. doi:
10.1111/j.1468-5914.1989.tb00133.x
Heft, H. (1996). “The ecological approach to navigation: a Gibsonian perspective, ”
in The Construction of Cognitive Maps , ed. J. Portugali (Norwell, MA: Kluwer
Academic), 105–132.
Heft, H. (2010). “Aﬀordances and the perception of landscape: an inquiry
into environmental perception and aesthetics, ” in Innovative Approaches to
Researching Landscape and Health , eds C. W. Thompson, P. Aspinall, and S.
Bell (Abingdon: Routledge), 9–32.
Heft, H. (2013). Environment, cognition, and culture: reconsidering the cognitive
map. J. Environ. Psychol. 33, 14–25. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2012.09.002
Herschbach, M. (2015). Direct social perception and dual process theories of
mindreading. Conscious. Cogn. 36, 483–497. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2015.04.001
Jongeneel, D., Withagen, R., and Zaal, F. T. J. M. (2015). Do children create
standardized playgrounds? A study on the gap-crossing aﬀordances of
jumping stones. J. Environ. Psychol. 44, 45–52. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2015.
09.003
Jorgensen, B. S., and Stedman, R. C. (2001). Sense of place as an attitude: lakeshore
owners attitudes toward their properties. J. Environ. Psychol. 21, 233–248.
doi: 10.1006/jevp.2001.0226
Jorgensen, B. S., and Stedman, R. C. (2006). A comparative analysis of predictors of
sense of place dimensions: attachment to, dependence on, and identiﬁcation
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 12 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1674
fpsyg-08-01674 September 27, 2017 Time: 16:55 # 13
Raymond et al. Sense of Place Blind Spots
with lakeshore properties. J. Environ. Manage. 79, 316–327. doi: 10.1016/j.
jenvman.2005.08.003
Kahneman, D. (2003). A perspective on judgment and choice - Mapping bounded
rationality. Am. Psychol. 58, 697–720. doi: 10.1037/0003-066x.58.9.697
Kaltenborn, B. P., and Williams, D. R. (2002). The meaning of place: attachments
to Femundsmarka National Park, Norway, among tourists and locals. Nor. J.
Geogr. 56, 189–198. doi: 10.1080/00291950260293011
Kiverstein, J. (2015). Empathy and the responsiveness to social aﬀordances.
Conscious. Cogn. 36, 532–542. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2015.05.002
Kyle, G., Graefe, A., and Manning, R. (2005). Testing the dimensionality of place
attachment in recreational settings. Environ. Behav. 37, 153–177. doi: 10.1177/
0013916504269654
Kyle, G., Graefe, A., Manning, R., Bacon, J., Library, A., and Raymond, C.
(2004). Eﬀect of activity involvement and place attachment on recreationists’
perceptions of setting density. J. Leis. Res. 36, 209–231.
Kyttä, M. (2002). Aﬀordances of children’s environments in the context of cities,
small towns, suburbs and rural villages in Finland and Belarus. J. Environ.
Psychol. 22, 109–123. doi: 10.1006/jevp.2001.0249
Kyttä, M. (2003). Children in Outdoor Contexts . Ph.D. thesis, Helsinki University
of Technology, Espoo.
Kyttä, M. (2004). The extent of children’s independent mobility and the number
of actualized aﬀordances as criteria for child-friendly environments. J. Environ.
Psychol. 24, 179–198. doi: 10.1016/S0272-4944(03)00073-2
Lakoﬀ, G., and Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the Flesh: The Embodied Mind
and its Challenge to Western Thought. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Lave, J., and Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral
Participation. Cambridge: Cambridge university press.
Leung, A. K.-Y. Y., Qiu, L., Ong, L., and Tam, K.-P. P. (2011). Embodied cultural
cognition: situating the study of embodied cognition in socio-cultural contexts.
Soc. Personal. Psychol. Compass 5, 591–608. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-9004.2011.
00373.x
Lewicka, M. (2005). Ways to make people active: role of place attachment, cultural
capital and neighborhood ties. J. Environ. Psychol. 4, 381–395. doi: 10.1016/j.
jenvp.2005.10.004
Lewicka, M. (2010). What makes neighborhood diﬀerent from home and city?
Eﬀects of place scale on place attachment. J. Environ. Psychol. 30, 35–51. doi:
10.1016/j.jenvp.2009.05.004
Lewicka, M. (2011). Place attachment: how far have we come in the last 40 years?
J. Environ. Psychol. 31, 207–230. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2010.10.001
Low, S. M., and Altman, I. (1992). “Place attachment: a conceptual inquiry, ” inPlace
Attachment, eds I. Altman and S. W. Low (New York, NY: Plenum), 1–12.
Lynch, K. (1960). The Image of the City. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Manzo, L. C. (2005). For better or worse: exploring multiple dimensions of
place meaning. J. Environ. Psychol. 25, 67–86. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2005.
01.002
Marr, D. (1982). Vision. San Francisco, CA: W. H. Freeman and Company.
Marsh, K. L., Johnston, L., Richardson, M. J., and Schmidt, R. C. (2009). Toward
a radically embodied, embedded social psychology. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 39,
1217–1225. doi: 10.1002/ejsp.666
Marshall, N. A., Park, S. E., Adger, W. N., Brown, K., and Howden, S. M. (2012).
Transformational capacity and the inﬂuence of place and identity. Environ. Res.
Lett. 7:34022. doi: 10.1088/1748-9326/7/3/034022
Masterson, V. A., Stedman, R. C., Enqvist, J., Tengö, M., Giusti, M., Wahl, D., et al.
(2017). The contribution of sense of place to social-ecological systems research:
a review and research agenda. Ecol. Soc. 22:49. doi: 10.5751/ES-08872-220149
Maturana, H. R., and Varela, F. (1987). The Tree of Knowledge, the Biological Roots
of Human Understanding. Boston, MA: Shambhala.
Medway, D. (2015). “Place branding and the ‘other’ senses’ , ” in Rethinking Place
Branding: Comprehensive Brand Development for Cities and Regions , eds M.
Kavaratzis, G. Warnaby, and G. J. Ashworth (Berlin: Springer).
Medway, D., Parker, C., Quin, S., and Roberts, G. (2016). Changing places; placing
change. J. Place Manag. Dev. 9, 191–209. doi: 10.1108/JPMD-02-2016-0007
Moore, K. D. (2014). An ecological framework of place: situating environmental
gerontology within a life course perspective. Int. J. Aging Hum. Dev. 79,
183–209. doi: 10.2190/AG.79.3.a
Newell, A. (1990). Uniﬁed Theories of Cognitions . Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Norberg-Schulz, C. (1980). Genius Loci: Towards a Phenomenology of Architecture.
New York, NY: Rizzoli.
Patterson, M. E. (1998). An hermeneutic approach to studying the nature of
wilderness experiences. J. Leis. Res. 30, 423–452.
Porter, N. (2013). “Single-minded, compelling, and unique”: visual
communications, landscape, and the calculated aesthetic of place branding.
Environ. Commun. 7, 231–254. doi: 10.1080/17524032.2013.779291
Proshansky, H. M., Fabian, A. K., Kaminoﬀ, R., Library, A., and Raymond, C.
(1983). Place-identity: physical world socialization of the self. J. Environ.
Psychol. 3, 57–83. doi: 10.1016/S0272-4944(83)80021-8
Ramkissoon, H., Graham Smith, L. D., and Weiler, B. (2013a). Testing the
dimensionality of place attachment and its relationships with place
satisfaction and pro-environmental behaviours: a structural equation
modelling approach. Tour. Manag. 36, 552–566. doi: 10.1016/j.tourman.2012.
09.003
Ramkissoon, H., Smith, L. D. G., and Weiler, B. (2013b). Relationships between
place attachment, place satisfaction and pro-environmental behaviour in an
Australian national park. J. Sustain. Tour. 21, 434–457. doi: 10.1080/09669582.
2012.708042
Raymond, C., Giusti, M., and Barthel, S. (2017). An embodied perspective
on the co-production of cultural ecosystem services: toward embodied
ecosystems. J. Environ. Plan. Manag. 1–22. doi: 10.1080/09640568.2017.13
12300
Raymond, C. M., Brown, G., and Robinson, G. M. (2011). The inﬂuence of place
attachment, and moral and normative concerns on the conservation of native
vegetation: a test of two behavioural models. J. Environ. Psychol. 31, 323–335.
doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2011.08.006
Raymond, C. M., Brown, G., and Weber, D. (2010). The measurement of place
attachment: personal, community and environmental connections. J. Environ.
Psychol. 30, 422–434. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2010.08.002
Raymond, C. M., Gottwald, S., Kouppa, J., and Kyttä, M. (2016). Integrating
multiple elements of environmental justice into urban blue space planning
using public participation GIS. Landsc. Urban Plan. 153, 198–208. doi: 10.1016/
j.landurbplan.2016.05.005
Relph, E. (1976). Place and Placelessness. London: Pion Limited.
Reyers, B., Nel, J. L., O’Farrell, P. J., Sitas, N., and Nel, D. C. (2015).
Navigating complexity through knowledge coproduction: mainstreaming
ecosystem services into disaster risk reduction. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
112:201414374. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1414374112
Richardson, M., Marsh, K., and Schmidt, R. (2005). Eﬀects of visual and
verbal interaction on unintentional interpersonal coordination. J. Exp.
Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform. 31, 62–79. doi: 10.1037/0096-1523.
31.1.62
Richardson, M. J., Marsh, K. L., Isenhower, R. W., Goodman, J. R. L., and Schmidt,
R. C. (2007). Rocking together: dynamics of intentional and unintentional
interpersonal coordination. Hum. Mov. Sci. 26, 867–891. doi: 10.1016/j.humov.
2007.07.002
Roe, J., and Aspinall, P. (2011). The emotional aﬀordances of forest settings:
an investigation in boys with extreme behavioural problems. Landsc. Res. 36,
535–552. doi: 10.1080/01426397.2010.543670
Rowles, G. D. (1983). Place and personal identity in old age: observations
from Appalachia. J. Environ. Psychol. 3, 299–313. doi: 10.1016/S0272-4944(83)
80033-4
Rubinstein, R. I., and Parmelee, P. A. (1992). “Attachment to place and the
representation of the life course by the elderly, ” in Place Attachment, eds I.
Altman and S. M. Low (Boston, MA: Springer), 139–163.
Russ, A., Peters, S. J. E., Krasny, M., and Stedman, R. C. (2015). Development
of ecological place meaning in New York City. J. Environ. Educ. 46, 73–93.
doi: 10.1080/00958964.2014.999743
Scannell, L., and Giﬀord, R. (2010). The relations between natural and civic place
attachment and pro-environmental behavior. J. Environ. Psychol. 30, 289–297.
doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2010.01.010
Seamon, D. (1979). A Geography of the Lifeworld. New York, NY: St. Martin’s.
Seamon, D. (2014). “Place attachment and phenomenology: the synergistic
dynamism of place, ” in Place Attachment: Advances in Theory, Methods and
Applications, eds L. Manzo and P. Devine-Wright (Abingdon: Routledge),
11–22.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 13 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1674
fpsyg-08-01674 September 27, 2017 Time: 16:55 # 14
Raymond et al. Sense of Place Blind Spots
Shapiro, L. (2011). The Routledge Handbook of Embodied Cognition . London:
Routledge.
Shockley, K., Richardson, D. C., and Dale, R. (2009). Conversation and
coordinative structures. Top. Cogn. Sci. 1, 305–319. doi: 10.1111/j.1756-8765.
2009.01021.x
Shotter, J. (1983). “Duality of structure” and “intentionality” in an ecological
psychology. J. Theory Soc. Behav. 13, 19–44. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-5914.1983.
tb00460.x
Smaldone, D., Harris, C., and Sanyal, N. (2005). An exploration of place as
a process: the case of Jackson Hole, WY. J. Environ. Psychol. 25, 397–414.
doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2005.12.003
Smaldone, D., Harris, C., and Sanyal, N. (2008). The role of time in developing
place meanings. J. Leis. Res. 40, 479–504.
Spackman, J. S., and Y anchar, S. C. (2014). Embodied cognition,
representationalism, and mechanism: a review and analysis. J. Theory
Soc. Behav. 44, 46–79. doi: 10.1111/jtsb.12028
Stanovich, K. (2009). “Distinguishing the reﬂective, algorithmic, and autonomous
minds: is it time for a tri-process theory?, ” inIn Two Minds: Dual Processes and
Beyond, eds J. S. B. T. Evans and K. Frankish (Oxford: Oxford University Press),
55–88.
Stedman, R. (2008). “What do we ‘mean’ by place meanings? implications of place
meanings for managers and practitioners, ” in Understanding Concepts of Place
in Recreation Research and Management, eds L. E. Kruger, T. E. Hall, and M. C.
Stiefel (Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture), 61–81.
Stedman, R. C. (1999). Sense of place as an indicator of community sustainability.
For. Chron. 75, 765–770. doi: 10.5558/tfc75765-5
Stedman, R. C. (2002). Toward a social psychology of place: predicting behavior
from place-based cognitions, attitude, and identity. Environ. Behav. 34,
561–581. doi: 10.1177/0013916502034005001
Stedman, R. C. (2003). Is it really just a social construction?: the contribution
of the physical environment to sense of place. Soc. Nat. Resour. 16, 671–685.
doi: 10.1080/08941920309189
Stedman, R. C. (2006). Understanding place attachment among second home
owners. Am. Behav. Sci. 50, 1–19. doi: 10.1177/0002764206290633
Stedman, R. C. (2016). Subjectivity and social-ecological systems: a rigidity trap
(and sense of place as a way out).Sustain. Sci. 11, 891–901. doi: 10.1007/s11625-
016-0388-y
Stedman, R. C., Library, A., and Raymond, C. (2002). Toward a psychology of
place: predicting behaviour from place-based cognitions, attitude, and identity.
Environ. Behav. 34, 561–581. doi: 10.1177/0013916502034005001
Tengö, M., Brondizio, E. S., Elmqvist, T., Malmer, P., and Spierenburg, M. (2014).
Connecting diverse knowledge systems for enhanced ecosystem governance:
the multiple evidence base approach. Ambio 43, 579–591. doi: 10.1007/s13280-
014-0501-3
Tuan, Y. (1974). Topophilia: A Study of Environmental Perception, Attitudes, and
Values. Upper Saddle Rive, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Tuan, Y. (1977). Space and Place: The Perspective of Experience. Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press.
Tuan, Y. F. (1980). Rootedness versus sense of place. Landscape 24, 3–8.
Vanclay, F., Higgins, M., and Blackshaw, A. (2008). Making Sense of Place:
Exploring Concepts and Expressions of Place through Diﬀerent Senses and Lenses.
Canberra, ACT: National Museum of Australia Press.
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., and Rosch, E. (1991). The Embodied Mind: Cognitive
Science and Human Experience. Boston, MA: MIT Press.
Vaske, J. J., and Kobrin, K. C. (2001). Place attachment and environmentally
responsible behavior. J. Environ. Educ. 32, 16–21. doi: 10.1080/
00958960109598658
Wagenaar, H. (2011). Meaning in Action: Interpretation and Dialogue in Policy
Analysis. London: M.E. Sharpe.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: learning as a social system. Syst.
Thinker 9, 1–5. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511803932
West, S. (2016). Meaning and Action in Sustainability Science: Interpretive
Approaches for Social-ecological Systems Research . Ph.D. thesis, Stockholm
Resilience Centre, Stockholm.
Williams, D. R. (2014a). ““Beyond the commodity metaphor, ” revisited: some
methodological reﬂections on place attachment research, ” in Place Attachment:
Advances in Theory, Methods and Applications, eds L. Manzo and P. D. Wright
(New York, NY: Routledge), 89–99.
Williams, D. R. (2014b). Making sense of “place”: reﬂections on pluralism and
positionality in place research. Landsc. Urban Plan. 131, 74–82. doi: 10.1016/
j.landurbplan.2014.08.002
Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition.Psychon. Bull. Rev.9, 625–636.
doi: 10.3758/BF03196322
Wiltshire, T. J., Lobato, E. J. C., McConnell, D. S., and Fiore, S. M. (2014). Prospects
for direct social perception: a multi-theoretical integration to further the science
of social cognition. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8:1007. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.
01007
Withagen, R., de Poel, H. J., Arajo, D., and Pepping, G. J. (2012). Aﬀordances
can invite behavior: reconsidering the relationship between aﬀordances and
agency. New Ideas Psychol. 30, 250–258. doi: 10.1016/j.newideapsych.2011.
12.003
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2017 Raymond, Kyttä and Stedman. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 14 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1674